
SS-2
SECRETARIAL STANDARD
ON
GENERAL MEETINGS
Issued by
The Institute of Company Secretaries of India
and
approved by the Central Government
under Section 118(10) of the Companies Act, 2013
(Revised version effective from 1st April, 2024)
i
First version: April 2015 (effective from 1st July, 2015)
Second version (Revised): June 2017 (effective from 1st October, 2017)
Third version (Revised): January 2024 (effective from 1st April, 2024)
Price : Rs.70/- (Excluding postage)
Issued by :
THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA
ICSI House, 22, Institutional Area, Lodi Road,
New Delhi 110 003
Phones : 011-4534 1000
E-mail info@icsi.edu • Website www.icsi.edu
ii
CONTENTS
Page No.
INTRODUCTION 1
SCOPE 1
DEFINITIONS 2
SECRETARIAL STANDARD 5
1. Convening a Meeting 5
2. Frequency of Meetings 14
3. Quorum 15
4. Presence of Directors and Auditors 16
5. Chairman 18
6. Proxies 19
7. Voting 23
8. Conduct of e-voting 26
9. Conduct of Poll 31
10. Prohibition on Withdrawal of Resolutions 33
11. Rescinding of Resolutions 33
12. Modifications to Resolutions 33
13. Reading of Reports 33
14. Distribution of Gifts 34
15. Adjournment of Meetings 34
16. Passing of Resolutions by postal ballot 36
iii
Page No.
17. Minutes 43
18. Preservation of Minutes and other Records 50
19. Report on Annual General Meeting 50
20. Disclosure 51
EFFECTIVE DATE 51
Annexure 52
Items of business which shall be passed only by postal ballot
iv
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 1
SECRETARIAL STANDARD
ON
GENERAL MEETINGS
Following is the text of the Secretarial Standard-2 (SS-2) on “General
Meetings”, issued by the Council of the Institute of Company Secretaries
of India and approved by the Central Government.
Adherence by a company to this Secretarial Standard is mandatory, as
per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.
(In this Secretarial Standard, the Standard portions have been
set in bold type. These shall be read in the context of the
background material which has been set in normal type. Both
the Standard portions and the background material have equal
authority).
INTRODUCTION
This Standard seeks to prescribe a set of principles for the convening
and conducting of General Meetings and matters related thereto.
This Standard also deals with conduct of e-voting and postal ballot.
SCOPE
This Standard is applicable to all types of General Meetings of all
companies incorporated under the Act except One Person Company
(OPC) and a company registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act,
2013 or corresponding provisions of any previous enactment thereof.
However, companies registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act,
2013 need to comply with the applicable provisions of the Act relating
to General Meetings.
2 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
The exemption to a company registered under Section 8 of the
Companies Act, 2013 as referred above and the specific exemptions
given to a private company and Government company in this Standard
shall be available only if it has not committed any default in filing its
Financial Statements or Annual Return with the Registrar of Companies.
The principles enunciated in this Standard for General Meetings of
Members are applicable mutatis-mutandis to Meetings of debenture-
holders and creditors. A Meeting of the Members or class of Members
or debenture-holders or creditors of a company under the directions of
the Court or the Company Law Board (CLB) or the National Company Law
Tribunal (NCLT) or any other prescribed authority shall be governed by
this Standard without prejudice to any rules, regulations and directions
prescribed for and orders of, such courts, judicial forums and other
authorities with respect to the conduct of such Meetings.
This Standard is in conformity with the provisions of the Act. However,
if, due to subsequent changes in the Act, a particular Standard or any
part thereof becomes inconsistent with the Act, the provisions of the
Act shall prevail.
DEFINITIONS
The following terms are used in this Standard with the meaning
specified:
“Act” means the Companies Act, 2013 (Act No. 18 of 2013) or any
previous enactment thereof, or any statutory modification thereto, or
re-enactment thereof and includes any Rules and Regulations framed
thereunder.
“Agency” means agency approved or recognised by the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs and appointed by the Board for providing and
supervising electronic platform for voting.
“Articles” means the Articles of Association of a company, as originally
framed or as altered from time to time or applied in pursuance of any
previous company law or the Companies Act, 2013.
“Calendar Year” means calendar year as per Gregorian calendar, i.e.,
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 3
a period of one year which begins on 1st January and ends on 31st
December.
“Chairman” means the Chairman of the Board or the Chairman
appointed or elected for a Meeting.
“Maintenance” means keeping registers and records either in physical
or electronic form, as may be permitted under any law for the time
being in force, and includes the making of necessary entries therein,
the authentication of such entries and the preservation of such physical
or electronic records.
“Meeting” or “General Meeting” or “Annual General Meeting” or
“Extra-Ordinary General Meeting” means a duly convened, held and
conducted Meeting of Members.
“Minutes” means a formal written record, in physical or electronic form,
of the proceedings of a Meeting.
“Minutes Book” means a Book maintained in physical or in electronic
form for the purpose of recording of Minutes.
“National Holiday” means Republic Day i.e. 26th January, Independence
Day i.e. 15th August, Gandhi Jayanti i.e. 2nd October and such other day
as may be declared as National Holiday by the Central Government.
“Ordinary Business” means business to be transacted at an Annual
General Meeting relating to (i) the consideration of financial statements,
consolidated financial statements, if any, and the reports of the Board
of Directors and Auditors; (ii) the declaration of any dividend; (iii) the
appointment of Directors in the place of those retiring; and (iv) the
appointment and fixing of remuneration of the Auditors.
“Proxy” means an instrument in writing signed by a Member, authorising
another person, whether a Member or not, to attend and vote on his
behalf at a Meeting and also where the context so requires, the person
so appointed by a Member.
“Quorum” means the minimum number of Members whose presence
is necessary for holding of a Meeting.
4 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
“Remote e-voting” means the facility of casting votes by a member
using an electronic voting system from a place other than venue of a
general meeting.
“Secretarial Auditor” means a Company Secretary in Practice or a firm
of Company Secretary(ies) in Practice appointed in pursuance of the
Act to conduct the secretarial audit of the company.
“Secured Computer System” means computer hardware, software,
and procedure that –
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorized access and misuse;
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions;
and
(d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures.
“Special Business” means business other than the Ordinary Business
to be transacted at an Annual General Meeting and all business to be
transacted at any other General Meeting.
“Timestamp” means the current time of an event that is recorded by
a Secured Computer System and is used to describe the time that is
printed to a file or other location to help keep track of when data is
added, removed, sent or received.
“Voting by electronic means” includes “remote e-voting” and voting at
the general meeting through an electronic voting system which may
be the same as used for remote e-voting.
“Voting by postal ballot” means voting by ballot, by post or by electronic
means.
“Voting Right” means the right of a Member to vote on any matter at a
Meeting of Members or by means of e-voting or postal or physical ballot.
Words and expressions used and not defined herein shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them under the Act.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 5
SECRETARIAL STANDARD
1. Convening a Meeting
1.1 Authority
A General Meeting shall be convened by or on the
authority of the Board.
The Board shall, every year, convene or authorise convening of a
Meeting of its Members called the Annual General Meeting to transact
items of Ordinary Business specifically required to be transacted at an
Annual General Meeting as well as Special Business, if any. If the Board
fails to convene its Annual General Meeting in any year, any Member
of the company may approach the prescribed authority, which may
then direct the calling of the Annual General Meeting of the company.
The Board may also, whenever it deems fit, call an Extra-Ordinary
General Meeting of the company.
The Board shall, on the requisition of Members who hold, as on the
date of the receipt of a valid requisition,
(a) in the case of company having a share capital, not less than
one-tenth of the paid-up share capital carrying Voting Rights or
(b) in the case of a company not having share capital, not less
than one-tenth of total voting power of the company,
call an Extra-Ordinary General Meeting of the company.
If, on receipt of a valid requisition having been made in this behalf, the
Board, within twenty-one days from the date of such receipt, fails to call
a Meeting on any day within forty-five days from the date of receipt of
such requisition, the requisitionists may themselves call and hold the
Meeting within three months from the date of requisition, in the same
manner in which the Board should have called and held the Meeting.
Explanatory statement need not be annexed to the Notice of an Extra-
Ordinary General Meeting convened by the requisitionists and the
requisitionists may disclose the reasons for the Resolution(s) which
they propose to move at the Meeting.
6 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Such requisition shall not pertain to any item of business that is required
to be transacted mandatorily through postal ballot.
1.2 Notice
1.2.1 Notice in writing of every Meeting shall be given to
every Member of the company. Such Notice shall
also be given to the Directors and Auditors of the
company, to the Secretarial Auditor, to Debenture
Trustees, if any, and, wherever applicable or so
required, to other specified persons.
In case of a Nidhi, Notice may be served individually only on Members
who hold shares of more than one thousand rupees in face value
or more than one percent of the total paid-up share capital of the
company, whichever is less. For other Members, Notice may be served
by a public notice in newspaper circulated in the district where the
Registered Office of the company is situated and by displaying the
same on the Notice Board of the company.
In the case of Members, Notice shall be given at the address registered
with the company or depository. In the case of shares or other securities
held jointly by two or more persons, the Notice shall be given to the
person whose name appears first as per records of the company or the
depository, as the case may be. In the case of any other person who
is entitled to receive Notice, the same shall be given to such person at
the address provided by him.
Where the company has received intimation of death of a Member, the
Notice of Meeting shall be sent as under:
(a) where securities are held singly, to the Nominee of the single
holder;
(b) where securities are held by more than one person jointly and
any joint holder dies, to the surviving first joint holder;
(c) where securities are held by more than one person jointly and
all the joint holders die, to the Nominee appointed by all the
joint holders;
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 7
In the absence of a Nominee, the Notice shall be sent to the legal
representative of the deceased Member.
In case of insolvency of a Member, the Notice shall be sent to the
assignee of the insolvent Member.
In case the Member is a company or body corporate which is being
wound up, Notice shall be sent to the liquidator.
1.2.2 Notice shall be sent by hand or by ordinary post or
by speed post or by registered post or by courier or
by facsimile or by e-mail or by any other electronic
means. ‘Electronic means’ means any communication
sent by a company through its authorised and
secured computer programme which is capable of
producing confirmation and keeping record of such
communication addressed to the person entitled to
receive such communication at the last electronic
mail address provided by the Member.
In case the Notice and accompanying documents are given by e-mail,
these shall be sent at the Members’ e-mail addresses, registered with
the company or provided by the depository, in the manner prescribed
under the Act.
The company shall ensure that it uses a system which produces
confirmation of the total number of recipients e-mailed and a record
of each recipient to whom the Notice has been sent and copy of such
record and any Notices of any failed transmissions and subsequent
re-sending shall be retained by or on behalf of the company as “proof
of sending” for such period as decided by the Board, which shall not
be less than three years from the date of the Meeting.
In case of the Directors, Auditors, Secretarial Auditors and others, if
any, the Notice and accompanying documents shall be sent at the
e-mail addresses provided by them to the company, if being sent by
electronic means.
Notice shall be sent to Members by registered post or speed post or
courier or e-mail and not by ordinary post in the following cases:
8 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
(a) if the company provides the facility of e-voting ;
(b) if the item of business is being transacted through postal ballot.
If a Member requests for delivery of Notice through a particular mode,
other than the one followed by the company, he shall pay such fees
as may be determined by the company in its Annual General Meeting
and the Notice shall be sent to him in such mode.
Notice shall be sent to Members by registered post or speed post or
e-mail if the Meeting is called by the requisitionists themselves where
the Board had not proceeded to call the Meeting.
1.2.3 In case of companies having a website, the Notice
shall simultaneously be hosted on the website till
the conclusion of the Meeting.
In case of a private company, the Notice shall be hosted on the website
of the company, if any, unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
1.2.4 Notice shall specify the day, date, time and full
address of the venue of the Meeting.
Notice of Annual General Meeting shall also specify the serial number
of the Meeting.
Notice shall contain complete particulars of the venue of the Meeting
including route map and prominent land mark, if any, for easy location,
except in case of –
(i) a company in which only its directors and their relatives are
members;
(ii) a wholly owned subsidiary.
An Annual General Meeting and a Meeting called by the requisitionists
shall be called during business hours, i.e., between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m.,
on a day that is not a National Holiday.
Annual General Meetings shall be held either at the registered office of
the company or at some other place within the city, town or village in
which the registered office of the company is situated. However, Annual
General Meetings of an unlisted company may be held at any place in
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 9
India, if prior consent is given by all the members either in writing or by
Electronic Mode. Such consent shall be received before the Meeting.
Extra-Ordinary General Meetings may be held at any place within India.
In case of a wholly owned subsidiary of a company incorporated outside
India, Extra-Ordinary General Meetings may be held outside India.
A Meeting called by the requisitionists shall be held either at the
registered office of the company or at some other place within the city,
town or village in which the registered office of the company is situated.
In case of a Government company, the Annual General Meeting shall
be held at its registered office or such other place within the city, town
or village in which the registered office of the company is situated or
such other place as the Central Government may approve in this behalf.
Notice of a company which has a share capital or the Articles of which
provide for voting at a Meeting by Proxy, shall prominently contain
a statement that a Member entitled to attend and vote is entitled to
appoint a Proxy, or where that is allowed, one or more Proxies, to attend
and vote instead of himself and that a Proxy need not be a Member.
In case of a private company, the Notice shall specify the entitlement of
a member to appoint Proxy in accordance with this paragraph, unless
otherwise provided in the Articles.
1.2.5 Notice shall clearly specify the nature of the Meeting
and the business to be transacted thereat. In respect of
items of Special Business, each such item shall be in the
form of a Resolution and shall be accompanied by an
explanatory statement which shall set out all such facts
as would enable a Member to understand the meaning,
scope and implications of the item of business and to
take a decision thereon. In respect of items of Ordinary
Business, Resolutions are not required to be stated in the
Notice.
The nature of the concern or interest (financial or otherwise), if any, of
the following persons, in any special item of business or in a proposed
Resolution, shall be disclosed in the explanatory statement:
10 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
(a) Directors and Manager;
(b) Other Key Managerial Personnel; and
(c) Relatives of the persons mentioned above.
In case any item of Special Business to be transacted at a Meeting of
the company relates to or affects any other company, the extent of
shareholding interest in that other company of every Promoter, Director,
Manager and of every other Key Managerial Personnel of the first
mentioned company shall, if the extent of such shareholding is not less
than two percent of the paid-up share capital of that company, also be
stated in the explanatory statement.
Where reference is made to any document, contract, agreement, the
Memorandum of Association or Articles of Association, the relevant
explanatory statement shall state that such documents are available
for inspection and such documents shall be so made available for
inspection in physical or in electronic form during specified business
hours at the Registered Office of the company and copies thereof shall
also be made available for inspection in physical or electronic form at
the Head Office as well as Corporate Office of the company, if any, if
such office is situated elsewhere, and also at the Meeting.
In case of a private company, explanatory statement shall comply with
the above requirements, unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
In all cases relating to the appointment or re-appointment and/or
fixation of remuneration of Directors including Managing Director or
Executive Director or Whole - time Director or of Manager or variation
of the terms of remuneration, details of each such Director or Manager,
including age, qualifications, experience, terms and conditions of
appointment or re-appointment along with details of remuneration
sought to be paid and the remuneration last drawn by such person,
if applicable, date of first appointment on the Board, shareholding in
the company, relationship with other Directors, Manager and other Key
Managerial Personnel of the company, the number of Meetings of the
Board attended during the year and other Directorships, Membership/
Chairmanship of Committees of other Boards shall be given in the
explanatory statement.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 11
In case of appointment of Independent Directors, the justification for
choosing the appointees for appointment as Independent Directors
shall be disclosed and in case of re-appointment of Independent
Directors, performance evaluation report of such Director or summary
thereof shall be included in the explanatory statement.
1.2.6 Notice and accompanying documents shall be
given at least twenty-one clear days in advance
of the Meeting.
For the purpose of reckoning twenty-one days clear Notice, the day of
sending the Notice and the day of Meeting shall not be counted. Further
in case the company sends the Notice by post or courier, an additional
two days shall be provided for the service of Notice.
In case of a private company, the period of sending Notice including
accompanying documents shall be as stated above, unless otherwise
provided in the Articles.
In case a valid special Notice under the Act has been received from
Member(s), the company shall give Notice of the Resolution to all its
Members at least seven days before the Meeting, exclusive of the day
of dispatch of Notice and day of the Meeting, in the same manner as
a Notice of any General Meeting is to be given.
Where this is not practicable, the Notice shall be published in a
vernacular newspaper in the principal vernacular language of the
district in which the registered office of the company is situated, and
in an English newspaper in English language, both having a wide
circulation in that district, at least seven days before the Meeting,
exclusive of the day of publication of the Notice and day of the Meeting.
In case of companies having a website, such Notice shall simultaneously
be hosted on the website.
1.2.7 Notice and accompanying documents may be
given at a shorter period of time if the requisite
consent of Members in writing is accorded thereto,
by physical or electronic means as under:
(i) In case of an Annual General Meeting, consent by
12 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
not less than ninety-five percent of the Members
entitled to vote at such Meeting.
However, the Financial Statements and other
documents required to be annexed thereto may
be given at a shorter period of time if the requisite
consent of Members in writing, by physical or
electronic means, is accorded thereto:
(a) if the company has a share capital, consent
by the majority in number of members
entitled to vote and represent not less than
ninety-five per cent of such part of the paid-
up share capital of the company as gives a
right to vote at the Meeting;
(b) if the company has no share capital,
consent by the Members having not less
than ninety-five per cent of the total voting
power exercisable at such Meeting.
(ii) In case of any other General Meeting-
(a) if the company has a share capital, consent
by the majority in number of members
entitled to vote and represent not less than
ninety-five per cent of such part of the paid-
up share capital of the company as gives a
right to vote at the Meeting;
(b) if the company has no share capital,
consent by the Members having not less
than ninety-five per cent of the total voting
power exercisable at such Meeting.
The request for consenting to shorter Notice and accompanying
documents shall be sent together with the Notice and the Meeting
shall be held only if the requisite consent of Members as stated above
is received prior to the time fixed for the Meeting.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 13
Where any Member of a company is entitled to vote only on some
resolution or resolutions to be moved at a Meeting and not on the
other, then vote of the Member with respect to shorter notice shall only
be counted for the purpose of the resolution on which the Member
can vote.
In addition, the company shall ensure compliance of provisions relating
to appointment of Proxy unless all the Members entitled to vote at such
Meeting, consent to holding of the General Meeting at shorter Notice.
In case of a private company, consent for shorter Notice shall be
obtained from such number of Members as specified in this paragraph,
unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
1.2.8 No business shall be transacted at a Meeting if
Notice in accordance with this Standard has not
been given.
However, any accidental omission to give Notice to, or the non-receipt
of such Notice by any Member or other person who is entitled to such
Notice for any Meeting shall not invalidate the proceedings of the
Meeting.
1.2.9 No items of business other than those specified in
the Notice and those specifically permitted under
the Act shall be taken up at the Meeting.
A Resolution shall be valid only if it is passed in respect of an item
of business contained in the Notice convening the Meeting or it is
specifically permitted under the Act.
Items specifically permitted under the Act which may be taken up for
consideration at the Meeting are:
(a) Proposed Resolutions, the Notice of which has been given by
Members;
(b) Resolutions requiring special Notice, if received with the
intention to move;
(c) Candidature for Directorship, if any such Notice has been
received.
14 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Where special Notice is required of any Resolution and Notice of the
intention to move such Resolution is received by the company from the
prescribed number of Members, such item of business shall be placed
for consideration at the Meeting after giving Notice of the Resolution to
Members in the manner prescribed under the Act.
Any amendment to the Notice, including the addition of any item of
business, can be made provided the Notice of amendment is given to
all persons entitled to receive the Notice of the Meeting at least twenty-
one clear days before the Meeting.
1.2.10 Notice shall be accompanied, by an attendance
slip and a Proxy form with clear instructions for
filling, stamping, signing and/or depositing the
Proxy form.
1.2.11 A Meeting convened upon due Notice shall not be
postponed or cancelled.
If, for reasons beyond the control of the Board, a Meeting cannot
be held on the date originally fixed, the Board may reconvene the
Meeting, to transact the same business as specified in the original
Notice, after giving not less than three days intimation to the Members.
The intimation shall be either sent individually in the manner stated in
this Standard or published in a vernacular newspaper in the principal
vernacular language of the district in which the registered office of the
company is situated, and in an English newspaper in English language,
both having a wide circulation in that district.
2. Frequency of Meetings
2.1 Annual General Meeting
Every company shall, in each Calendar Year, hold a
General Meeting called the Annual General Meeting.
Every company shall hold its first Annual General Meeting within nine
months from the date of closing of the first financial year of the company
and thereafter in each Calendar Year within six months of the close
of the financial year, with an interval of not more than fifteen months
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 15
between two successive Annual General Meetings. The aforesaid
period of six months or interval of fifteen months may be extended
by a period not exceeding three months with the prior approval of
the Registrar of Companies, in case of any Annual General Meeting
other than the first Annual General Meeting. If a company holds its
first Annual General Meeting, as aforesaid, it shall not be necessary
for the company to hold any Annual General Meeting in the Calendar
Year of its incorporation.
2.2 Extra-Ordinary General Meeting
Items of business other than Ordinary Business may be
considered at an Extra-Ordinary General Meeting or by
means of a postal ballot, if thought fit by the Board.
3. Quorum
3.1 Quorum shall be present throughout the Meeting.
Quorum shall be present not only at the time of commencement of the
Meeting but also while transacting business.
Unless the Articles provide for a larger number, the Quorum for a
General Meeting shall be:
(a) in case of a public company, –
(i) five Members personally present if the number of
Members as on the date of Meeting is not more than
one thousand;
(ii) fifteen Members personally present if the number of
Members as on the date of Meeting is more than one
thousand but up to five thousand;
(iii) thirty Members personally present if the number of
Members as on the date of the Meeting exceeds five
thousand;
(b) in the case of a private company, two Members personally
present.
16 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Where the Quorum provided in the Articles is higher than that provided
under the Act, the Quorum shall conform to such higher requirement.
Members need to be personally present at a Meeting to constitute
the Quorum.
Proxies shall be excluded for determining the Quorum.
3.2 A duly authorised representative of a body corporate
or the representative of the President of India or the
Governor of a State is deemed to be a Member personally
present and enjoys all the rights of a Member present in
person.
One person can be an authorised representative of more than one
body corporate. In such a case, he is treated as more than one Member
present in person for the purpose of Quorum. However, to constitute
a Meeting, at least two individuals shall be present in person. Thus, in
case of a public company having not more than 1000 members with
a Quorum requirement of five Members, an authorised representative
of five bodies corporate cannot form a Quorum by himself but can do
so if at least one more Member is personally present.
Members who have voted by Remote e-voting have the right to attend
the General Meeting and accordingly their presence shall be counted
for the purpose of Quorum.
A Member who is not entitled to vote on any particular item of business
being a related party, if present, shall be counted for the purpose of
Quorum.
The stipulation regarding the presence of a Quorum does not apply
with respect to items of business transacted through postal ballot.
4. Presence of Directors and Auditors
4.1 Directors
4.1.1 If any Director is unable to attend the Meeting,
the Chairman shall explain such absence at the
Meeting.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 17
The Chairman of the Audit Committee, Nomination and Remuneration
Committee and the Stakeholders Relationship Committee, or any other
Member of any such Committee authorised by the Chairman of the
respective Committee to attend on his behalf, shall attend the General
Meeting.
4.1.2 Directors who attend General Meetings of the
company and the Company Secretary shall be
seated with the Chairman.
The Company Secretary shall assist the Chairman in conducting the
Meeting.
4.2 Auditors
The Auditors, unless exempted by the company, shall, either by
themselves or through their authorised representative, attend
the General Meetings of the company and shall have the right
to be heard at such Meetings on that part of the business which
concerns them as Auditors.
The authorised representative who attends the General Meeting of the
company shall also be qualified to be an Auditor.
4.3 Secretarial Auditor
The Secretarial Auditor, unless exempted by the company shall,
either by himself or through his authorised representative,
attend the Annual General Meeting and shall have the right to
be heard at such Meeting on that part of the business which
concerns him as Secretarial Auditor.
The Chairman may invite the Secretarial Auditor or his authorised
representative to attend any other General Meeting, if he considers
it necessary.
The authorised representative who attends the General Meeting of the
company shall also be qualified to be a Secretarial Auditor.
18 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
5. Chairman
5.1 Appointment
The Chairman of the Board shall take the Chair and conduct the
Meeting. If the Chairman is not present within fifteen minutes
after the time appointed for holding the Meeting, or if he is
unwilling to act as Chairman of the Meeting, or if no Director
has been so designated, the Directors present at the Meeting
shall elect one of themselves to be the Chairman of the Meeting.
If no Director is present within fifteen Minutes after the time
appointed for holding the Meeting, or if no Director is willing
to take the Chair, the Members present shall elect, on a show
of hands, one of themselves to be the Chairman of the Meeting,
unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
If a poll is demanded on the election of the Chairman, it shall be taken
forthwith in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Chairman
elected on a show of hands shall continue to be the Chairman of the
Meeting until some other person is elected as Chairman as a result
of the poll, and such other person shall be the Chairman for the rest
of the Meeting.
In case of a private company, appointment of the Chairman shall be
in accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided in the
Articles.
The Chairman shall ensure that the Meeting is duly constituted in
accordance with the Act and the Articles or any other applicable laws,
before it proceeds to transact business. The Chairman shall then
conduct the Meeting in a fair and impartial manner and ensure that
only such business as has been set out in the Notice is transacted. The
Chairman shall regulate the manner in which voting is conducted at
the Meeting keeping in view the provisions of the Act.
5.2 The Chairman shall explain the objective and implications
of the Resolutions before they are put to vote at the
Meeting.
The Chairman shall provide a fair opportunity to Members who are
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 19
entitled to vote to seek clarifications and/or offer comments related to
any item of business and address the same, as warranted.
5.3 In case of public companies, the Chairman shall not
propose any Resolution in which he is deemed to be
concerned or interested nor shall he conduct the
proceedings for that item of business.
If the Chairman is interested in any item of business, without prejudice
to his Voting Rights on Resolutions, he shall entrust the conduct of the
proceedings in respect of such item to any Non -Interested Director or
to a Member, with the consent of the Members present, and resume
the Chair after that item of business has been transacted.
6. Proxies
6.1 Right to Appoint
A Member entitled to attend and vote is entitled to appoint a
Proxy, or where that is allowed, one or more Proxies, to attend
and vote instead of himself and a Proxy need not be a Member.
A Proxy can act on behalf of Members not exceeding fifty and holding
in the aggregate not more than ten percent of the total share capital
of the company carrying Voting Rights.
However, a Member holding more than ten percent of the total share
capital of the company carrying Voting Rights may appoint a single
person as Proxy for his entire shareholding and such person shall not
act as a Proxy for another person or shareholder.
If a Proxy is appointed for more than fifty Members, he shall choose
any fifty Members and confirm the same to the company before the
commencement of specified period for inspection. In case, the Proxy
fails to do so, the company shall consider only the first fifty Proxies
received as valid.
In case of a private company, the Proxy shall be appointed in accordance
with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
20 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
6.2 Form of Proxy
6.2.1 An instrument appointing a Proxy shall be in the
Form prescribed under the Act.
Such instrument shall not be questioned on the ground that it fails to
comply with any special requirements specified by the Articles of a
company.
The instrument of Proxy shall be signed by the appointer or his attorney
duly authorised in writing, or if the appointer is a body corporate, be
under its seal or be signed by an officer or an attorney duly authorised
by it.
6.2.2 An instrument of Proxy duly filled, stamped and
signed, is valid only for the Meeting to which it
relates including any adjournment thereof.
6.3 Stamping of Proxies
An instrument of Proxy is valid only if it is properly stamped as
per the applicable law. Unstamped or inadequately stamped
Proxies or Proxies upon which the stamps have not been
cancelled are invalid.
6.4 Execution of Proxies
6.4.1 The Proxy-holder shall prove his identity at the
time of attending the Meeting.
6.4.2 An authorised representative of a body corporate
or of the President of India or of the Governor of a
State, holding shares in a company, may appoint
a Proxy under his signature.
6.5 Proxies in Blank and Incomplete Proxies
6.5.1 A Proxy form which does not state the name of
the Proxy shall not be considered valid.
6.5.2 Undated Proxy shall not be considered valid.
6.5.3 If a company receives multiple Proxies for the
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 21
same holdings of a Member, the Proxy which is
dated last shall be considered valid; if they are
not dated or bear the same date without specific
mention of time, all such multiple Proxies shall be
treated as invalid.
6.6 Deposit of Proxies and Authorisations
6.6.1 Proxies shall be deposited with the company either
in person or through post not later than forty-eight
hours before the commencement of the Meeting in
relation to which they are deposited and a Proxy
shall be accepted even on a holiday if the last date
by which it could be accepted is a holiday.
Any provision in the Articles of a company which specifies or requires
a longer period for deposit of Proxy than forty-eight hours before a
Meeting of the company shall have effect as if a period of forty-eight
hours had been specified in or required for such deposit.
In case of a private company, the Proxy shall be deposited with the
company in accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided
in the Articles.
6.6.2 If the Articles so provide, a Member who has
not appointed a Proxy to attend and vote on his
behalf at a Meeting may appoint a Proxy for any
adjourned Meeting, not later than forty-eight
hours before the time of such adjourned Meeting.
6.6.3 In case of remote e-voting:
(i) the letter of appointment of representative(s)
of the President of India or the Governor of
a State; or
(ii) the authorisation in respect of representative(s)
of the Corporations;
shall be received by the scrutiniser/company on
or before close of e-voting.
22 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
In case of postal ballot such letter of appointment/ authorisation shall
be submitted to the scrutiniser alongwith physical ballot form.
If the representative attends the Meeting in person to vote thereat, the
letter of appointment / authorisation, as the case may be, shall be
submitted before the commencement of Meeting.
6.7 Revocation of Proxies
6.7.1 If a Proxy had been appointed for the original
Meeting and such Meeting is adjourned, any
Proxy given for the adjourned Meeting revokes
the Proxy given for the original Meeting.
6.7.2 A Proxy later in date revokes any Proxy/Proxies
dated prior to such Proxy.
6.7.3 A Proxy is valid until written notice of revocation
has been received by the company before the
commencement of the Meeting or adjourned
Meeting, as the case may be.
An undated notice of revocation of Proxy shall not be accepted. A notice
of revocation shall be signed by the same Member (s) who had signed
the Proxy, in the case of joint Membership.
6.7.4 When a Member appoints a Proxy and both the
Member and Proxy attend the Meeting, the Proxy
stands automatically revoked.
6.8 Inspection of Proxies
6.8.1 Requisitions, if any, for inspection of Proxies shall
be received in writing from a Member entitled to
vote on any Resolution at least three days before
the commencement of the Meeting.
6.8.2 Proxies shall be made available for inspection
during the period beginning twenty-four hours
before the time fixed for the commencement of
the Meeting and ending with the conclusion of
the Meeting.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 23
Inspection shall be allowed between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. during such
period.
In case of a private company, inspection of Proxies shall be as stated
above, unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
6.8.3 A fresh requisition, conforming to the above
requirements, shall be given for inspection of
Proxies in case the original Meeting is adjourned.
6.9 Record of Proxies
6.9.1 All Proxies received by the company shall be
recorded chronologically in a register kept for
that purpose.
6.9.2 In case any Proxy entered in the register is
rejected, the reasons therefor shall be entered in
the remarks column.
7. Voting
7.1 Proposing a Resolution at a Meeting
Every Resolution, except a Resolution which has been put to
vote through Remote e-Voting or on which a poll has been
demanded, shall be proposed by a Member and seconded by
another Member.
7.2 E-voting
7.2.1 Every company having its equity shares listed on a
recognized stock exchange other than companies
whose equity shares are listed on SME Exchange
or on the Institutional Trading Platform and other
companies as prescribed shall provide e-voting
facility to their Members to exercise their Voting
Rights.
Other companies presently prescribed are companies having not less
than one thousand Members.
24 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Nidhis are not required to provide e-voting facility to their Members.
The facility of Remote e-voting does not dispense with the requirement
of holding a General Meeting by the company.
7.2.2 Voting at the Meeting
Every company, which has provided e-voting facility to its
Members, shall also put every Resolution to vote through a
ballot process at the Meeting.
Ballot process may be carried out by distributing ballot/poll slips or by
making arrangement for voting through computer or secure electronic
systems.
Any Member, who has already exercised his votes through Remote
e-voting, may attend the Meeting but is prohibited to vote at the Meeting
and his vote, if any, cast at the Meeting shall be treated as invalid.
A Proxy can vote in the ballot process.
7.3 Show of Hands
Every company shall, at the Meeting, put every Resolution,
except a Resolution which has been put to Remote e-voting, to
vote on a show of hands at the first instance, unless a poll is
validly demanded.
A Proxy cannot vote on a show of hands.
In case of a private company, the voting by show of hands shall be
in accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided in the
Articles.
7.4 Poll
The Chairman shall order a poll upon receipt of a valid demand
for poll either before or on the declaration of the result of the
voting on any Resolution on show of hands.
Poll in such cases shall be through a Ballot process.
While a Proxy cannot speak at the Meeting, he has the right to demand
or join in the demand for a poll.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 25
The poll may be taken by the Chairman, on his own motion also.
In case of a private company, the poll shall be conducted in accordance
with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
7.5 Voting Rights
7.5.1 Every Member holding equity shares and, in
certain cases as prescribed in the Act, every
Member holding preference shares, shall be
entitled to vote on a Resolution.
Every Member entitled to vote on a Resolution and present in person
shall, on a show of hands, have only one vote irrespective of the number
of shares held by him.
A Member present in person or by Proxy shall, on a poll or ballot, have
votes in proportion to his share in the paid up equity share capital of
the company, subject to differential rights as to voting, if any, attached
to certain shares as stipulated in the Articles or by the terms of issue
of such shares.
Preference shareholders have a right to vote only in certain cases as
prescribed under the Act.
In case of a private company, the Voting Rights shall be reckoned in
accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided in the
Memorandum or Articles of the company.
In case of a Nidhi, no Member shall exercise Voting Rights on poll in
excess of five percent of total Voting Rights of equity shareholders.
7.5.2 A Member who is a related party is not entitled to
vote on a Resolution relating to approval of any
contract or arrangement in which such Member
is a related party, except in case of a company
in which ninety percent or more Members, in
number, are relatives of promoters or are related
parties.
Further in case of wholly owned subsidiary, the
resolution passed by the holding company shall
26 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
be sufficient for the purpose of entering into the
transactions between wholly owned subsidiary
and holding company.
In case of a private company, a member who is a
related party is entitled to vote on such Resolution.
A member who is a related party is entitled to
vote on a Resolution pertaining to approval of
any contract or arrangement to be entered into
by:
(a) A Government company with any other
Government company or with Central
Government or any State Government or
any combination thereof; or
(b) An unlisted Government company with
the prior approval of competent authority,
other than those contract or arrangements
referred in clause (a).
7.6 Second or Casting Vote
Unless otherwise provided in the Articles, in the event of equality
of votes, whether on show of hands or electronically or on a poll,
the Chairman of the Meeting shall have a second or casting vote.
Where the Chairman has entrusted the conduct of proceedings in
respect of an item in which he is interested to any Non-Interested
Director or to a Member, a person who so takes the Chair shall have
a second or casting vote.
8. Conduct of e-voting
8.1 Every company that is required or opts to provide
e-voting facility to its Members shall comply with the
provisions in this regard.
8.2 Every company providing e-voting facility shall offer
such facility to all Members, irrespective of whether they
hold shares in physical form or in dematerialised form.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 27
8.3 The facility for Remote e-voting shall remain open for
not less than three days.
The voting period shall close at 5 p.m. on the day preceding the date
of the General Meeting.
8.4 Board Approval
The Board shall:
(a) appoint one or more scrutinisers for e-voting or the
ballot process;
The scrutiniser(s) may be a Company Secretary in Practice, a Chartered
Accountant in Practice, a Cost Accountant in Practice, or an Advocate
or any other person of repute who is not in the employment of the
company and who can, in the opinion of the Board, scrutinise the
e-voting process or the ballot process, as the case may be, in a fair
and transparent manner.
The scrutiniser(s) so appointed may take assistance of a person who
is not in employment of the company and who is well-versed with the
e-voting system.
Prior consent to act as a scrutiniser(s) shall be obtained from the
scrutiniser(s) and placed before the Board for noting.
(b) appoint an Agency;
(c) decide the cut-off date for the purpose of reckoning the
names of Members who are entitled to Voting Rights;
The cut-off date for determining the Members who are entitled to vote
through Remote e-voting or voting at the meeting shall be a date not
earlier than seven days prior to the date fixed for the Meeting.
Only Members as on the cut-off date, who have not exercised their
Voting Rights through Remote e-voting, shall be entitled to vote at the
Meeting.
8.5 Notice
8.5.1 Notice of the Meeting, wherein the facility of
e-voting is provided, shall be sent either by
28 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
registered post or speed post or by courier or by
e-mail or by any other electronic means.
An advertisement containing prescribed details shall be published,
immediately on completion of despatch of Notices for Meeting but
atleast twenty one days before the date of the General Meeting, at least
once in a vernacular newspaper in the principal vernacular language
of the district in which the registered office of the company is situated
and having a wide circulation in that district and at least once in English
language in an English newspaper, having country-wide circulation,
and specifying therein, inter-alia the following matters, namely:
(a) A statement to the effect that the business may be transacted
by e-voting;
(b) The date and time of commencement of Remote e-voting;
(c) The date and time of end of Remote e-voting;
(d) The cut-off date as on which the right of voting of the Members
shall be reckoned;
(e) The manner in which persons who have acquired shares and
become Members after the despatch of Notice may obtain the
login ID and password;
(f) The manner in which company shall provide for voting by
Members present at the Meeting;
(g) The statement that:
(i) Remote e-voting shall not be allowed beyond the said
date and time;
(ii) a Member may participate in the General Meeting
even after exercising his right to vote through Remote
e-voting but shall not be entitled to vote again; and
(iii) a Member as on the cut-off date shall only be entitled
for availing the Remote e-voting facility or vote, as the
case may be, in the General Meeting;
(h) Website address of the company, in case of companies having
a website and Agency where Notice is displayed; and
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 29
(i) Name, designation, address, e-mail ID and phone number of
the person responsible to address the grievances connected
with the e-voting.
Advertisement shall simultaneously be placed on the website of the
company till the conclusion of Meeting, in case of companies having
a website and of the Agency.
8.5.2 Notice shall simultaneously be placed on the
website of the company, in case of companies
having a website, and of the Agency.
Such Notice shall remain on the website till the date of General Meeting.
8.5.3 Notice shall inform the Members about procedure
of Remote e-voting, availability of such facility
and provide necessary information thereof to
enable them to access such facility.
Notice shall clearly state that the company is providing e-voting facility
and that the business may be transacted through such voting.
Notice shall describe clearly the Remote e-voting procedure and the
procedure of voting at the General Meeting by Members who do not
vote by Remote e-voting.
Notice shall also clearly specify the date and time of commencement
and end of Remote e-voting and contain a statement that at the end
of Remote e-voting period, the facility shall forthwith be blocked.
Notice shall also contain contact details of the official responsible to
address the grievances connected with voting by electronic means.
Notice shall clearly specify that any Member, who has voted by Remote
e-voting, cannot vote at the Meeting.
Notice shall also specify the mode of declaration of the results of
e-voting.
Notice shall also clearly mention the cut-off date as on which the right
of voting of the Members shall be reckoned and state that a person
who is not a Member as on the cut off date should treat this Notice for
information purposes only.
30 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Notice shall provide the details about the login ID and the process and
manner for generating or receiving the password and for casting of
vote in a secure manner.
8.6 Declaration of results
8.6.1 The scrutiniser(s) shall submit his report within
three days from the date of the Meeting to the
Chairman or a person authorised by him, who
shall countersign the same and declare the result
of the voting forthwith with details of the number
of votes cast for and against the Resolution,
invalid votes and whether the Resolution has
been carried or not.
8.6.2 The result of the voting, with details of the number
of votes cast for and against the Resolution,
invalid votes and whether the Resolution has been
carried or not shall be displayed for at least three
days on the Notice Board of the company at its
Registered Office and its Head Office as well as
Corporate Office, if any, if such office is situated
elsewhere. Further, the results of voting alongwith
the scrutiniser’s report shall also be placed on the
website of the company, in case of companies
having a website and of the Agency, immediately
after the results are declared.
8.6.3 The Resolution, if passed by a requisite majority,
shall be deemed to have been passed on the date
of the relevant General Meeting.
8.7 Custody of scrutinisers’ register, report and other related
papers
The scrutinisers’ register, report and other related papers
received from the scrutiniser(s) shall be kept in the custody of
the Company Secretary or any other person authorised by the
Board for this purpose.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 31
9. Conduct of Poll
9.1 When a poll is demanded on any Resolution, the
Chairman shall get the validity of the demand verified
and, if the demand is valid, shall order the poll forthwith
if it is demanded on the question of appointment of the
Chairman or adjournment of the Meeting and, in any
other case, within forty-eight hours of the demand for
poll.
9.2 In the case of a poll, which is not taken forthwith, the
Chairman shall announce the date, venue and time of
taking the poll to enable Members to have adequate
and convenient opportunity to exercise their vote. The
Chairman may permit any Member who so desires to be
present at the time of counting of votes.
If the date, venue and time of taking the poll cannot be announced at
the Meeting, the Chairman shall inform the Members, the modes and
the time of such communication, which shall in any case be within
twenty four hours of closure of the Meeting.
A Member who did not attend the Meeting can participate and vote
in the poll in such cases.
In case of a private company, the demand and conduct of poll shall be
as stated above, unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
9.3 Each Resolution put to vote by poll shall be put to vote
separately.
One ballot paper may be used for more than one item.
9.4 Appointment of scrutinisers
The Chairman shall appoint such number of scrutinisers, as he
deems necessary, who may include a Company Secretary in
Practice, a Chartered Accountant in Practice, a Cost Accountant
in Practice, an Advocate or any other person of repute who is not
in the employment of the company, to ensure that the scrutiny of
the votes cast on a poll is done in a fair and transparent manner.
32 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
In case of a private company, the appointment of scrutiniser(s) shall
be in accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided in
the Articles.
9.5 Declaration of results
9.5.1 The scrutiniser(s) shall submit his report within
seven days from the last date of the poll to the
Chairman who shall countersign the same and
declare the result of the poll within two days
of the submission of report by the scrutiniser,
with details of the number of votes cast for and
against the Resolution, invalid votes and whether
the Resolution has been carried or not.
In case Chairman is not available, for such purpose, the report by the
scrutiniser shall be submitted to a person authorised by the Chairman
to receive such report, who shall countersign the scrutiniser’s report on
behalf of the Chairman.
The result shall be announced by the Chairman or any other person
authorised by the Chairman in writing for this purpose.
The Chairman of the Meeting shall have the power to regulate the
manner in which the poll shall be taken and shall ensure that the poll
is scrutinised in the manner prescribed under the Act.
In case of a private company, the declaration of result of poll shall be
in accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided in the
Articles.
9.5.2 The result of the poll with details of the number of
votes cast for and against the Resolution, invalid
votes and whether the Resolution has been carried
or not shall be displayed for at least three days on
the Notice Board of the company at its Registered
Office and its Head Office as well as Corporate
Office, if any, if such office is situated elsewhere,
and in case of companies having a website, shall
also be placed on the website.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 33
9.5.3 The result of the poll shall be deemed to be the
decision of the Meeting on the Resolution on
which the poll was taken.
10. Prohibition on Withdrawal of Resolutions
Resolutions for items of business which are likely to affect the
market price of the securities of the company shall not be
withdrawn. Further, any resolution proposed for consideration
through e-voting shall not be withdrawn.
11. Rescinding of Resolutions
A Resolution passed at a Meeting shall not be rescinded
otherwise than by a Resolution passed at a subsequent Meeting.
12. Modifications to Resolutions
Modifications to any Resolution which do not change the
purpose of the Resolution materially may be proposed, seconded
and adopted by the requisite majority at the Meeting and,
thereafter, the modified Resolution shall be duly proposed,
seconded and put to vote.
No modification to any proposed text of the Resolution shall be made
if it in any way alters the substance of the Resolution as set out in the
Notice. Grammatical, clerical, factual and typographical errors, if any,
may be corrected as deemed fit by the Chairman.
No modification shall be made to any Resolution which has already
been put to vote by Remote e-voting before the Meeting.
13. Reading of Reports
13.1 The qualifications, observations or comments or other
remarks, if any, mentioned in the Auditor’s Report on
the financial transactions, which have any adverse effect
on the functioning of the company shall be read at the
Annual General Meeting and attention of the Members
present shall be drawn to the explanations / comments
given by the Board of Directors in their report.
34 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
13.2 The qualifications, observations or comments or other
remarks if any, mentioned in the Secretarial Audit Report
issued by the Company Secretary in Practice, which have
any material adverse effect on the functioning of the
company, shall be read at the Annual General Meeting
and attention of Members present shall be drawn to the
explanations / comments given by the Board of Directors
in their report.
14. Distribution of Gifts
No gifts, gift coupons, or cash in lieu of gifts shall be distributed
to Members at or in connection with the Meeting.
15. Adjournment of Meetings
15.1 A duly convened Meeting shall not be adjourned unless
circumstances so warrant. The Chairman may adjourn
a Meeting with the consent of the Members, at which
a Quorum is present, and shall adjourn a Meeting if so
directed by the Members.
Meetings shall stand adjourned for want of requisite Quorum.
The Chairman may also adjourn a Meeting in the event of disorder or
other like causes, when it becomes impossible to conduct the Meeting
and complete its business.
15.2 If a Meeting is adjourned sine-die or for a period of thirty
days or more, a Notice of the adjourned Meeting shall
be given in accordance with the provisions contained
hereinabove relating to Notice.
15.3 If a Meeting is adjourned for a period of less than
thirty days, the company shall give not less than three
days’ Notice specifying the day, date, time and venue of
the Meeting, to the Members either individually or by
publishing an advertisement in a vernacular newspaper
in the principal vernacular language of the district in
which the registered office of the company is situated,
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 35
and in an English newspaper in English language, both
having a wide circulation in that district.
However, if a Meeting is adjourned for a period not exceeding three
days and where an announcement of adjournment has been made
at the Meeting itself, giving in the details of day, date, time, venue and
business to be transacted at the adjourned Meeting, the company may
also opt to give Notice of such adjourned Meeting either individually or
by publishing an advertisement, as stated above.
15.4 If a Meeting, other than an Annual General Meeting and
a requisitioned Meeting, stands adjourned for want of
Quorum, the adjourned Meeting shall be held on the
same day, in the next week at the same time and place
or on such other day or at such other time and place as
may be determined by the Board.
If a Meeting is adjourned for want of a Quorum to the same day on
the next week, at the same time and place or with a change of day,
time or place, the company shall give not less than three days’ Notice
specifying the day, date, time and venue of the Meeting, to the Members
either individually or by publishing an advertisement in a vernacular
newspaper in the principal vernacular language of the district in which
the registered office of the company is situated, and in an English
newspaper in English language, both having a wide circulation in that
district.
If, at an adjourned Meeting, Quorum is not present within half an hour
from the time appointed, the Members present, being not less than
two in number, will constitute the Quorum.
An adjourned Annual General Meeting, adjourned for want of quorum
or otherwise, shall not be held on a National Holiday, only if any item
relating to filling up of vacancy of a director retiring by rotation is included
in the agenda of such adjourned Meeting.
The company shall ensure compliance of the provisions of holding the
Annual General Meeting every year, including adjournment thereof
within a gap of not exceeding 15 months from the date of the previous
36 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Annual General Meeting or within such extended period permitted by
the Registrar of Companies.
In case of a private company, the adjournment of Meeting for want of
quorum shall be in accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise
provided in the Articles.
15.5 If, within half an hour from the time appointed for
holding a Meeting called by requisitionists, a Quorum is
not present, the Meeting shall stand cancelled.
In case of a private company, the requisitioned meeting shall stand
cancelled in accordance with this paragraph, unless otherwise provided
in the Articles.
15.6 At an adjourned Meeting, only the unfinished business
of the original Meeting shall be considered.
Any Resolution passed at an adjourned Meeting would be deemed to
have been passed on the date of the adjourned Meeting and not on
any earlier date.
16. Passing of Resolutions by postal ballot
16.1 Every company, except a company having less than or
equal to two hundred Members, shall transact items of
business as prescribed, only by means of postal ballot
instead of transacting such business at a General
Meeting. However, such item of business may be
transacted at a General Meeting by a company which is
required to provide e-voting facility to its Members.
The list of items of businesses requiring to be transacted only by means
of a postal ballot is given at Annexure.
The Board may however opt to transact any other item of special
business, not being any business in respect of which Directors or
Auditors have a right to be heard at the Meeting, by means of postal
ballot.
Ordinary Business shall not be transacted by means of a postal ballot.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 37
16.2 Every company having its equity shares listed on a
recognised stock exchange other than companies
whose equity shares are listed on SME Exchange or on
the Institutional Trading Platform and other companies
which are required to provide e-voting facility shall
provide such facility to its Members in respect of those
items, which are required to be transacted through
postal ballot.
Other companies presently prescribed are companies having not less
than one thousand Members.
Nidhis are not required to provide e-voting facility to their Members.
16.3 Board Approval
The Board shall:
(a) identify the businesses to be transacted through postal
ballot;
(b) approve the Notice of postal ballot incorporating
proposed Resolution(s) and explanatory statement
thereto;
(c) authorise the Company Secretary or where there is no
Company Secretary, any Director of the company to
conduct postal ballot process and sign and send the
Notice along with other documents;
(d) appoint one scrutiniser for the postal ballot;
The scrutiniser may be a Company Secretary in Practice, a Chartered
Accountant in Practice, a Cost Accountant in Practice, an Advocate
or any other person of repute who is not in the employment of the
company and, who can in the opinion of the Board, scrutinise the postal
ballot process in a fair and transparent manner.
The scrutiniser shall however not be an officer or employee of the
company.
The scrutiniser so appointed may take assistance of a person who is
38 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
not in employment of the company and who is well-versed with the
e-voting system.
Prior consent to act as a scrutiniser shall be obtained from the scrutiniser
and placed before the Board for noting.
(e) appoint an Agency in respect of e-voting for the postal
ballot;
(f) decide the cut-off date for reckoning Voting Rights and
ascertaining those Members to whom the Notice and
postal ballot forms shall be sent.
Only Members as on the cut-off date shall be entitled to vote on the
proposed Resolution by postal ballot.
16.4 Notice
16.4.1 Notice of the postal ballot shall be given in
writing to every Member of the company. Such
Notice shall be sent either by registered post or
speed post, or by courier or by e-mail or by any
other electronic means at the address registered
with the company.
The Notice shall be accompanied by the postal ballot form with the
necessary instructions for filling, signing and returning the same.
In case the Notice and accompanying documents are sent to Members
by e-mail, these shall be sent to the Members’ e-mail addresses,
registered with the company or provided by the depository, in the
manner prescribed under the Act.
Such Notice shall also be given to the Directors and Auditors of the
company, to the Secretarial Auditor, to Debenture Trustees, if any, and,
wherever applicable or so required, to other specified recipients.
An advertisement containing prescribed details shall be published
at least once in a vernacular newspaper in the principal vernacular
language of the district in which the registered office of the company is
situated, and having a wide circulation in that district, and at least once
in English language in an English newspaper having a wide circulation in
that district, about having dispatched the Notice and the ballot papers.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 39
16.4.2 In case of companies having a website, Notice of
the postal ballot shall simultaneously be placed
on the website.
Such Notice shall remain on the website till the last date for receipt of
the postal ballot forms from the Members.
16.4.3 Notice shall specify the day, date, time and venue
where the results of the voting by postal ballot
will be announced and the link of the website
where such results will be displayed.
Notice shall also specify the mode of declaration of the results of the
voting by postal ballot.
16.4.4 Notice of the postal ballot shall inform the
Members about availability of e-voting facility, if
any, and provide necessary information thereof to
enable them to access such facility.
In case the facility of e-voting has been made available, the provisions
relating to conduct of e-voting shall apply, mutatis mutandis, as far as
applicable.
Notice shall describe clearly the e-voting procedure.
Notice shall also clearly specify the date and time of commencement
and end of e-voting, if any and contain a statement that voting shall not
be allowed beyond the said date and time. Notice shall also contain
contact details of the official responsible to address the grievances
connected with the e-voting for postal ballot.
Notice shall clearly specify that any Member cannot vote both by post
and e-voting and if he votes both by post and e-voting, his vote by post
shall be treated as invalid.
The advertisement shall, inter alia, state the following matters:
(a) a statement to the effect that the business is to be transacted
by postal ballot which may include voting by electronic means;
(b) the date of completion of dispatch of Notices;
40 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
(c) the date of commencement of voting (postal and e-voting);
(d) the date of end of voting (postal and e-voting);
(e) the statement that any postal ballot form received from the
Member after thirty days from the date of dispatch of Notice
will not be valid;
(f) a statement to the effect that Member who has not received
postal ballot form may apply to the company and obtain a
duplicate thereof;
(g) contact details of the person responsible to address the
queries/grievances connected with the voting by postal ballot
including voting by electronic means, if any; and
(h) day, date, time and venue of declaration of results and the link
of the website where such results will be displayed.
Notice and the advertisement shall clearly mention the cut-off date as
on which the right of voting of the Members shall be reckoned and
state that a person who is not a Member as on the cut-off date should
treat this Notice for information purposes only.
16.4.5 Each item proposed to be passed through postal
ballot shall be in the form of a Resolution and shall
be accompanied by an explanatory statement
which shall set out all such facts as would enable
a Member to understand the meaning, scope and
implications of the item of business and to take a
decision thereon.
16.5 Postal ballot forms
16.5.1 The postal ballot form shall be accompanied by a
postage prepaid reply envelope addressed to the
scrutiniser.
A single postal ballot form may provide for multiple items of business
to be transacted.
16.5.2 The postal ballot form shall contain instructions
as to the manner in which the form is to be
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 41
completed, assent or dissent is to be recorded
and its return to the scrutiniser.
The postal ballot form may specify instances in which such form shall
be treated as invalid or rejected and procedure for issue of duplicate
postal ballot forms.
16.5.3 A postal ballot form shall be considered invalid if:
(a) A form other than one issued by the company
has been used;
(b) It has not been signed by or on behalf of the
Member;
(c) Signature on the postal ballot form doesn’t
match the specimen signatures with the
company;
(d) It is not possible to determine without any
doubt the assent or dissent of the Member;
(e) Neither assent nor dissent is mentioned;
(f) Any competent authority has given directions
in writing to the company to freeze the
Voting Rights of the Member;
(g) The envelope containing the postal
ballot form is received after the last date
prescribed;
(h) The postal ballot form, signed in a
representative capacity, is not accompanied
by a certified copy of the relevant specific
authority;
(i) It is received from a Member who is in
arrears of payment of calls;
(j) It is defaced or mutilated in such a way that
its identity as a genuine form cannot be
established;
42 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
(k) Member has made any amendment to the
Resolution or imposed any condition while
exercising his vote.
A postal ballot form which is otherwise complete in all respects and
is lodged within the prescribed time limit but is undated shall be
considered valid.
16.6 Declaration of results
16.6.1 The scrutiniser shall submit his report within seven
days from the last date of receipt of postal ballot
forms to the Chairman or a person authorised by
him, who shall countersign the same and declare
the result of the postal ballot on the date, time
and venue specified in the Notice, with details
of the number of votes cast for and against the
Resolution, invalid votes and the final result as to
whether the Resolution has been carried or not.
16.6.2 The result of the voting with details of the number
of votes cast for and against the Resolution, invalid
votes and whether the Resolution has been carried
or not, along with the scrutiniser’s report shall be
displayed for at least three days on the Notice
Board of the company at its Registered Office and
its Head Office as well as Corporate Office, if any,
if such office is situated elsewhere, and also be
placed on the website of the company, in case of
companies having a website.
16.6.3 The Resolution, if passed by requisite majority,
shall be deemed to have been passed on the last
date specified by the company for receipt of duly
completed postal ballot forms or e-voting.
16.7 Custody of scrutiniser’s registers, report and other
related papers
The postal ballot forms, other related papers, register and
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 43
scrutiniser’s report received from the scrutiniser shall be kept
in the custody of the Company Secretary or any other person
authorised by the Board for this purpose.
16.8 Rescinding the Resolution
A Resolution passed by postal ballot shall not be rescinded
otherwise than by a Resolution passed subsequently through
postal ballot or passed at a General Meeting by a company
which is required to provide e-voting facility to its Members.
16.9 Modification to the Resolution
No amendment or modification shall be made to any Resolution
circulated to the Members for passing by means of postal ballot.
17. Minutes
Every company shall keep Minutes of all Meetings. Minutes kept in
accordance with the provisions of the Act evidence the proceedings
recorded therein. Minutes help in understanding the deliberations and
decisions taken at the Meeting.
17.1 Maintenance of Minutes
17.1.1 Minutes shall be recorded in books maintained
for that purpose.
17.1.2 A distinct Minutes Book shall be maintained
for Meetings of the Members of the company,
creditors and others as may be required under
the Act.
Resolutions passed by postal ballot shall be recorded in the Minutes
book of General Meetings.
17.1.3 A company may maintain its Minutes in physical
or in electronic form.
Minutes may be maintained in electronic form in such manner as
prescribed under the Act and as may be decided by the Board. Minutes
in electronic form shall be maintained with Timestamp.
44 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
A company shall, however, follow a uniform and consistent form of
maintaining the Minutes. Any deviation in such form of maintenance
shall be authorised by the Board.
17.1.4 The pages of the Minutes Books shall be
consecutively numbered.
This shall be followed irrespective of a break in the Book arising out of
periodical binding in case the Minutes are maintained in physical form.
This shall be equally applicable for maintenance of Minutes Book in
electronic form with Timestamp.
In the event any page or part thereof in the Minutes Book is left blank,
it shall be scored out and initialled by the Chairman who signs the
Minutes.
17.1.5 Minutes shall not be pasted or attached to the
Minutes Book, or tampered with in any manner.
17.1.6 Minutes of Meetings, if maintained in loose-leaf
form, shall be bound periodically at least once in
every three years.
There shall be a proper locking device to ensure security and proper
control to prevent removal or manipulation of the loose leaves.
17.1.7 Minutes Books shall be kept at the Registered
Office of the company.
17.2 Contents of Minutes
17.2.1 General Contents
17.2.1.1 Minutes shall state, at the beginning the Meeting,
name of the company, day, date, venue and time
of commencement of the Meeting.
Minutes of Annual General Meeting shall also state the serial number
of the Meeting.
In case a Meeting is adjourned, the Minutes shall be entered in respect
of the original Meeting as well as the adjourned Meeting. In respect of
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 45
a Meeting convened but adjourned for want of Quorum a statement to
that effect shall be recorded by the Chairman or any Director present
at the Meeting in the Minutes.
17.2.1.2 Minutes shall record the names of the Directors
and the Company Secretary present at the
Meeting.
The names of the Directors shall be listed in alphabetical order or in
any other logical manner, but in either case starting with the name of
the person in the Chair.
17.2.2 Specific Contents
17.2.2.1 Minutes shall, inter alia, contain:
(a) The Record of election, if any, of the
Chairman of the Meeting.
(b) The fact that certain registers,
documents, the Auditor’s Report and
Secretarial Audit Report, as prescribed
under the Act were available for
inspection.
(c) The Record of presence of Quorum.
(d) The number of Members present in
person including representatives.
(e) The number of Proxies and the number
of shares represented by them.
(f) The presence of the Chairmen of
the Audit Committee, Nomination
and Remuneration Committee and
Stakeholders Relationship Committee
or their authorised representatives.
(g) The presence if any, of the Secretarial
Auditor, the Auditors, or their authorised
representatives, the Court/Tribunal
appointed observers or scrutinisers.
46 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
(h) Summary of the opening remarks of the
Chairman.
(i) Reading of qualifications, observations
or comments or other remarks on the
financial transactions, which have any
adverse effect on the functioning of the
company, as mentioned in the report of
the Auditors.
(j) Reading of qualifications, observations
or comments or other remarks, which
have any material adverse effect
on the functioning of the company,
as mentioned in the report of the
Secretarial Auditor.
(k) Summary of the clarifications provided
on various Agenda Items.
(l) In respect of each Resolution, the type
of the Resolution, the names of the
persons who proposed and seconded
and the majority with which such
Resolution was passed.
Where a motion is moved to modify a proposed Resolution, the result
of voting on such motion shall be mentioned. If a Resolution proposed
undergoes modification pursuant to a motion by shareholders, the
Minutes shall contain the details of voting for the modified Resolution.
(m) In the case of poll, the names of
scrutinisers appointed and the number
of votes cast in favour and against the
Resolution and invalid votes.
(n) If the Chairman vacates the Chair in
respect of any specific item, the fact
that he did so and in his place some
other Director or Member took the
Chair.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 47
(o) The time of commencement and
conclusion of the Meeting.
17.2.2.2 In respect of Resolutions passed by e-voting
or postal ballot, a brief report on the e-voting
or postal ballot conducted including the
Resolution proposed, the result of the voting
thereon and the summary of the scrutiniser’s
report shall be recorded in the Minutes Book
and signed by the Chairman or in the event
of death or inability of the Chairman, by
any Director duly authorised by the Board
for the purpose, within thirty days from the
date of passing of Resolution by e-voting or
postal ballot.
17.3 Recording of Minutes
17.3.1 Minutes shall contain a fair and correct summary
of the proceedings of the Meeting.
The Company Secretary shall record the proceedings of the Meetings.
Where there is no Company Secretary, any other person authorised by
the Board or by the Chairman in this behalf shall record the proceedings.
The Chairman shall ensure that the proceedings of the Meeting are
correctly recorded.
The Chairman has absolute discretion to exclude from the Minutes,
matters which in his opinion are or could reasonably be regarded as
defamatory of any person, irrelevant or immaterial to the proceedings
or which are detrimental to the interests of the company.
17.3.2 Minutes shall be written in clear, concise and
plain language.
Minutes shall be written in third person and past tense. Resolutions
shall however be written in present tense.
Minutes need not be an exact transcript of the proceedings at the
Meeting.
48 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
17.3.3 Each item of business taken up at the Meeting
shall be numbered.
Numbering shall be in a manner which would enable ease of reference
or cross-reference.
17.4 Entry in the Minutes Book
17.4.1 Minutes shall be entered in the Minutes Book
within thirty days from the date of conclusion of
the Meeting.
In case a Meeting is adjourned, the Minutes in respect of the original
Meeting as well as the adjourned Meeting shall be entered in the
Minutes Book within thirty days from the date of the respective Meetings.
17.4.2 The date of entry of the Minutes in the Minutes
Book shall be recorded by the Company Secretary.
Where there is no Company Secretary, it shall be entered by any other
person authorised by the Board or the Chairman.
17.4.3 Minutes, once entered in the Minutes Book, shall
not be altered.
17.5 Signing and Dating of Minutes
17.5.1 Minutes of a General Meeting shall be signed
and dated by the Chairman of the Meeting or in
the event of death or inability of that Chairman,
by any Director who was present in the Meeting
and duly authorised by the Board for the purpose,
within thirty days of the General Meeting.
17.5.2 The Chairman shall initial each page of the
Minutes, sign the last page and append to such
signature the date on which and the place where
he has signed the Minutes.
Any blank space in a page between the conclusion of the Minutes and
signature of the Chairman shall be scored out.
If the Minutes are maintained in electronic form, the Chairman shall
sign the Minutes digitally.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 49
17.6 Inspection and Extracts of Minutes
17.6.1 Directors and Members are entitled to inspect
the Minutes of all General Meetings including
Resolutions passed by postal ballot.
Minutes of all General Meetings shall be open for inspection by any
Member during business hours of the company, without charge, subject
to such reasonable restrictions as the company may, by its Articles or
in General Meeting, impose, so, however, that not less than two hours
in each business day are allowed for inspection.
The Company Secretary in Practice appointed by the company, the
Secretarial Auditor, the Statutory Auditor, the Cost Auditor or the Internal
Auditor of the company can inspect the Minutes as he may consider
necessary for the performance of his duties.
Inspection of Minutes Book may be provided in physical or in electronic
form.
While providing inspection of Minutes Book, the Company Secretary
or the official of the company authorised by the Company Secretary
to facilitate inspection shall take all precautions to ensure that the
Minutes Book is not mutilated or in any way tampered with by the
person inspecting.
17.6.2 Extract of the Minutes shall be given only after
the Minutes have been duly signed. However, any
Resolution passed at a Meeting may be issued
even pending signing of the Minutes, provided the
same is certified by the Chairman or any Director
or the Company Secretary.
When a Member requests in writing for a copy of any Minutes, which he
is entitled to inspect, the company shall furnish the same within seven
working days of receipt of his request, subject to payment of such fee
as may be specified in the Articles of the company. In case a Member
requests for the copy of the Minutes in electronic form, in respect of any
previous General Meetings held during a period immediately preceding
three financial years, the company shall furnish the same on payment
of such fee as prescribed under the Act.
50 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Copies of the Minutes or the extracts thereof as requisitioned by the
Member, duly certified by the Company Secretary or where there is
no Company Secretary, an officer duly authorised by the Board in this
behalf, may be provided in physical or electronic form.
18. Preservation of Minutes and other Records
18.1 Minutes of all Meetings shall be preserved permanently
in physical or in electronic form with Timestamp.
Where, under a scheme of arrangement, a company has been merged
or amalgamated with another company, Minutes of all Meetings of the
transferor company, as handed over to the transferee company, shall
be preserved permanently by the transferee company, notwithstanding
that the transferor company might have been dissolved.
18.2 Office copies of Notices, scrutiniser’s report and related
papers shall be preserved in good order in physical or
in electronic form for as long as they remain current or
for eight financial years, whichever is later and may be
destroyed thereafter with the approval of the Board.
Office copies of Notices, scrutiniser’s report and related papers of the
transferor company, as handed over to the transferee company, shall
be preserved in good order in physical or electronic form for as long
as they remain current or for eight financial years, whichever is later
and may be destroyed thereafter with the approval of the Board and
permission of the Central Government, where applicable.
18.3 Minutes Books shall be kept in the custody of the
Company Secretary.
Where there is no Company Secretary, Minutes shall be kept in the
custody of any Director duly authorised for the purpose by the Board.
19. Report on Annual General Meeting
Every listed public company shall prepare a report on Annual
General Meeting in the prescribed form, including a confirmation
that the Meeting was convened, held and conducted as per the
provisions of the Act.
SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS 51
Such report which shall be a fair and correct summary of the
proceedings of the Meeting shall contain:
(a) the day, date, time and venue of the Annual General Meeting;
(b) confirmation with respect to appointment of Chairman of the
Meeting;
(c) number of Members attending the Meeting;
(d) confirmation of Quorum;
(e) confirmation with respect to compliance of the Act and
Standards with respect to calling, convening and conducting
the Meeting;
(f) business transacted at the Meeting and result thereof with a
brief summary of the discussions;
(g) particulars with respect to any adjournment, postponement of
Meeting, change in venue; and
(h) any other points relevant for inclusion in the report.
Such report shall be filed with the Registrar of Companies within thirty
days of the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting.
20. Disclosure
The Annual Return of a company shall disclose the date of
Annual General Meeting held during the financial year.
EFFECTIVE DATE
This Standard shall come into effect from 1st April, 2024.
52 SS-2 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON GENERAL MEETINGS
Annexure
(Paragraph 16.1)
Items of business which shall be passed only by postal ballot
1. Alteration of the objects clause of the Memorandum and in
the case of the company in existence immediately before the
commencement of the Act, alteration of the Main Objects of the
Memorandum
2. Alteration of Articles of Association in relation to insertion or
removal of provisions which are required to be included in the
Articles of a company in order to constitute it a private company
3. Change in place of Registered Office outside the local limits of
any city, town or village
4. Change in objects for which a company has raised money from
public through prospectus and still has any unutilised amount
out of the money so raised
5. Issue of shares with differential rights as to voting or dividend
or otherwise
6. Variation in the rights attached to a class of shares or
debentures or other securities
7. Buy-back of shares by a company
8. Appointment of a Director elected by Small Shareholders
9. Sale of the whole or substantially the whole of an undertaking
of a company or where the company owns more than one
undertaking, of whole or substantially the whole of any of such
undertakings
10. Giving loans or extending guarantee or providing security in
excess of the limit specified
11. Any other Resolution prescribed under any applicable law,
rules or regulations.
