
SS-1
SECRETARIAL STANDARD
ON
MEETINGS OF THE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Issued by
The Institute of Company Secretaries of India
and
approved by the Central Government
under Section 118(10) of the Companies Act, 2013
(Revised version effective from 1st April, 2024)
i
First version: April 2015 (effective from 1st July, 2015)
Second version (Revised): June 2017 (effective from 1st October, 2017)
Third version (Revised): January 2024 (effective from 1st April, 2024)
Price : Rs. 70/- (Excluding postage)
Issued by :
THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA
ICSI House, 22, Institutional Area, Lodi Road,
New Delhi 110 003
Phones : 011-4534 1000
E-mail info@icsi.edu • Website www.icsi.edu
ii
CONTENTS
Page No.
INTRODUCTION 1
SCOPE 1
DEFINITIONS 2
SECRETARIAL STANDARD 4
1. Convening a Meeting 4
2. Frequency of Meetings 10
3. Quorum 11
4. Attendance at Meetings 13
5. Chairman 15
6. Passing of Resolution by Circulation 17
7. Minutes 21
8. Preservation of Minutes and other Records 30
9. Disclosure 30
EFFECTIVE DATE 30
Annexure ‘A’ 31
Illustrative list of items of business which shall not be passed by
circulation and shall be placed before the Board at its Meeting
Annexure ‘B’ 34
Illustrative list of items of business for the Agenda for the First
Meeting of the Board of the company
iii
iv
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1
SECRETARIAL STANDARD
ON
MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The following is the text of the Secretarial Standard-1 (SS-1) on “Meetings
of the Board of Directors”, issued by the Council of the Institute of
Company Secretaries of India and approved by the Central Government.
Adherence by a company to this Secretarial Standard is mandatory, as
per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013.
(In this Secretarial Standard, the Standard portions have been
set in bold type. These shall be read in the context of the
background material which has been set in normal. Both the
Standard portions and the background material have equal
authority).
INTRODUCTION
This Standard prescribes a set of principles for convening and
conducting Meetings of the Board of Directors and matters related
thereto.
SCOPE
This Standard is applicable to the Meetings of Board of Directors of all
companies incorporated under the Act except One Person Company
(OPC) in which there is only one Director on its Board and a company
registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 or corresponding
provisions of any previous enactment thereof.
However, companies registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act,
2013 need to comply with the applicable provisions of the Act relating
to Board Meetings.
2 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The exemption to a company registered under Section 8 of the
Companies Act, 2013 as referred above and the specific exemptions
given to a private company in this Standard shall be available only if
it has not committed any default in filing its Financial Statements or
Annual Return with the Registrar of Companies.
The principles enunciated in this Standard for Meetings of the Board of
Directors are also applicable to Meetings of Committee(s) of the Board,
unless otherwise stated herein or stipulated by any other applicable
Guidelines, Rules or Regulations.
This Standard is in conformity with the provisions of the Act. However,
if, due to subsequent changes in the Act, a particular Standard or any
part thereof becomes inconsistent with the Act, the provisions of the
Act shall prevail.
DEFINITIONS
The following terms are used in this Standard with the meaning
specified:
“Act” means the Companies Act, 2013 (Act No. 18 of 2013) or any
previous enactment thereof, or any statutory modification thereto or
re-enactment thereof and includes any Rules and Regulations framed
thereunder.
“Articles” means the Articles of Association of a company, as originally
framed or as altered from time to time or applied in pursuance of any
previous company law or the Companies Act, 2013.
“Calendar Year” means calendar year as per Gregorian calendar i.e.
a period of one year which begins on 1st January and ends on 31st
December.
“Chairman” means the Chairman of the Board or its Committee, as
the case may be, or the Chairman appointed or elected for a Meeting.
“Committee” means a Committee of Directors mandatorily required to
be constituted by the Board under the Act.
“Electronic Mode” in relation to Meetings means Meetings through video
conferencing or other audio-visual means. “Video conferencing or other
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 3
audio-visual means” means audio-visual electronic communication
facility employed which enables all the persons participating in a
Meeting to communicate concurrently with each other without an
intermediary and to participate effectively in the Meeting.
“Invitee” means a person, other than a Director and Company Secretary,
who attends a particular Meeting by invitation.
“Maintenance” means keeping of registers and records either in
physical or electronic form, as may be permitted under any law for
the time being in force, and includes the making of appropriate entries
therein, the authentication of such entries and the preservation of such
physical or electronic records.
“Meeting” means a duly convened, held and conducted Meeting of the
Board or any Committee thereof.
“Minutes” means a formal written record, in physical or electronic form,
of the proceedings of a Meeting.
“Minutes Book” means a Book maintained in physical or in electronic
form for the purpose of recording of Minutes.
“National Holiday” means Republic Day i.e. 26th January, Independence
Day i.e. 15th August, Gandhi Jayanti i.e. 2nd October and such other day
as may be declared as National Holiday by the Central Government.
“Original Director” means a Director in whose place the Board has
appointed any other individual as an Alternate Director.
“Quorum” means the minimum number of Directors whose presence
is necessary for holding of a Meeting.
“Secretarial Auditor” means a Company Secretary in Practice or a firm
of Company Secretary(ies) in Practice appointed in pursuance of the
Act to conduct the secretarial audit of the company.
“Secured Computer System” means computer hardware, software,
and procedure that –
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorized access and misuse;
4 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and
(d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures.
“Timestamp” means the current time of an event that is recorded by
a Secured Computer System and is used to describe the time that is
printed to a file or other location to help keep track of when data is
added, removed, sent or received.
Words and expressions used and not defined herein shall have the
meaning respectively assigned to them under the Act.
SECRETARIAL STANDARD
1. Convening a Meeting
1.1 Authority
1.1.1 Any Director of a company may, at any time,
summon a Meeting of the Board, and the
Company Secretary or where there is no Company
Secretary, any person authorised by the Board in
this behalf, on the requisition of a Director, shall
convene a Meeting of the Board, in consultation
with the Chairman or in his absence, the
Managing Director or in his absence, the Whole-
time Director, where there is any, unless otherwise
provided in the Articles.
1.1.2 The Chairman may, unless dissented to or
objected by the majority of Directors present at
a Meeting at which a Quorum is present, adjourn
the Meeting for any reason, at any stage of the
Meeting.
1.2 Day, Time, Place, Mode and Serial Number of Meeting
1.2.1 Every Meeting shall have a serial number.
1.2.2 A Meeting may be convened at any time and
place, on any day.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 5
Notice of the Meeting shall clearly mention a venue,
whether registered office or otherwise, to be the venue
of the Meeting and all the recordings of the proceedings
of the Meeting, if conducted through Electronic Mode,
shall be deemed to be made at such place.
1.2.3 Any Director may participate through Electronic
Mode in a Meeting unless the Act or any other law
specifically prohibits such participation through
Electronic Mode in respect of any item of business.
Directors shall not participate through Electronic Mode in the discussion
on restricted items unless there is a Quorum in a Meeting through
physical presence of Directors.
1.3 Notice
1.3.1 Notice in writing of every Meeting shall be given
to every Director by hand or by speed post or by
registered post or by facsimile or by e-mail or by
any other electronic means.
The Notice shall be sent to the postal address or e-mail address,
registered by the Director with the company or in the absence of such
details or any change thereto, any of such addresses appearing in the
Director Identification Number (DIN) registration of the Director.
Where a Director specifies a particular means of delivery of Notice,
the Notice shall be given to him by such means. However, in case of a
Meeting conducted at a shorter Notice, the company may choose an
expedient mode of sending Notice.
Proof of sending Notice and its delivery shall be maintained by the
company for such period as decided by the Board, which shall not be
less than three years from the date of the Meeting.
1.3.2 Notice shall be issued by the Company Secretary
or where there is no Company Secretary, any
Director or any other person authorised by the
Board for the purpose.
6 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
1.3.3 The Notice shall specify the serial number, day,
date, time and full address of the venue of the
Meeting.
1.3.4 The Notice shall inform the Directors about the
option available to them to participate through
Electronic Mode and provide them all the
necessary information.
If a Director intends to participate through Electronic Mode, he shall give
sufficient prior intimation to the Chairman or the Company Secretary to
enable them to make suitable arrangements in this behalf.
The Director may intimate his intention of participation through Electronic
Mode at the beginning of the Calendar Year also, which shall be valid
for such Calendar Year.
Such intimation shall not debar him from participation in the Meeting
in person provided he gives such intimation sufficiently in advance to
the company.
The Notice shall also contain the contact number or e-mail address(es)
of the Chairman or the Company Secretary or any other person
authorised by the Board, to whom the Director shall confirm in this
regard. In the absence of an advance communication or confirmation
from the Director as above, it shall be assumed that he will attend the
Meeting physically.
1.3.5 The Notice of a Meeting shall be given even if
Meetings are held on pre-determined dates or at
pre-determined intervals.
1.3.6 Notice convening a Meeting shall be given at
least seven days before the date of the Meeting,
unless the Articles prescribe a longer period.
In case the company sends the Notice by speed post or by registered
post, an additional two days shall be added for the service of Notice.
Notice of an adjourned Meeting shall be given to all Directors including
those who did not attend the Meeting on the originally convened date
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 7
and unless the date of adjourned Meeting is decided at the Meeting,
Notice thereof shall also be given not less than seven days before the
Meeting.
1.3.7 The Agenda, setting out the business to be
transacted at the Meeting, and Notes on Agenda
shall be given to the Directors at least seven days
before the date of the Meeting, unless the Articles
prescribe a longer period.
Agenda and Notes on Agenda shall be sent to all Directors by hand
or by speed post or by registered post or by e-mail or by any other
electronic means. These shall be sent to the postal address or e-mail
address or any other electronic address registered by the Director with
the company or in the absence of such details or any change thereto, to
any of such addresses appearing in the Director Identification Number
(DIN) registration of the Directors.
In case the company sends the Agenda and Notes on Agenda by speed
post or by registered post, an additional two days shall be added for
the service of Agenda and Notes on Agenda.
Where a Director specifies a particular means of delivery of Agenda
and Notes on Agenda, these papers shall be sent to him by such
means. However, in case of a Meeting conducted at a shorter Notice,
the company may choose an expedient mode of sending Agenda and
Notes on Agenda.
Proof of sending Agenda and Notes on Agenda and their delivery shall
be maintained by the company for such period as decided by the Board,
which shall not be less than three years from the date of the Meeting.
The Notice, Agenda and Notes on Agenda shall be sent to the Original
Director also at the address registered with the company, even if these
have been sent to the Alternate Director. However, the mode of sending
Notice, Agenda and Notes on Agenda to the Original Director shall be
decided by the company.
Notes on items of business which are in the nature of Unpublished
Price Sensitive Information may be given at a shorter period of time
than stated above, with the consent of a majority of the Directors, which
shall include at least one Independent Director, if any.
8 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
For this purpose,
“Unpublished Price Sensitive Information” means any information,
relating to a company or its securities, directly or indirectly, that is
not generally available, which upon becoming generally available, is
likely to materially affect the price of the securities and shall, ordinarily
including but not restricted to, information relating to the following: –
(i) financial results;
(ii) dividends;
(iii) change in capital structure;
(iv) mergers, de-mergers, acquisitions, delistings, disposals and
expansion of business and such other transactions; and
(v) changes in key managerial personnel*.
General consent for giving Notes on items of Agenda which are in the
nature of Unpublished Price Sensitive Information at a shorter Notice
may be taken in the first Meeting of the Board held in each financial
year and also whenever there is any change in Directors.
Where general consent as above has not been taken, the requisite
consent shall be taken before the concerned items are taken up for
consideration at the Meeting. The fact of consent having been taken
shall be recorded in the Minutes.
Supplementary Notes on any of the Agenda Items may be circulated
at or prior to the Meeting but shall be taken up with the permission
of the Chairman and with the consent of a majority of the Directors
present in the Meeting, which shall include at least one Independent
Director, if any.
1.3.8 Each item of business requiring approval at the
Meeting shall be supported by a note setting
out the details of the proposal, relevant material
facts that enable the Directors to understand the
meaning, scope and implications of the proposal
* Definition under SEBI (Prohibition of Insider Trading) Regulations, 2015.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 9
and the nature of concern or interest, if any, of
any Director in the proposal, which the Director
had earlier disclosed.
Where approval by means of a Resolution is required, the draft of such
Resolution shall be either set out in the note or placed at the Meeting.
However, any other decision taken at the Meeting may also be recorded
in the Minutes in the form of Resolution.
The items of business that are required by the Act or any other
applicable law to be considered at a Meeting of the Board shall be
placed before the Board at its Meeting. An illustrative list of such items
is given at Annexure ‘A’.
There are certain items which shall be placed before the Board at its
first Meeting. An illustrative list thereof is given at Annexure ‘B’.
1.3.9 Each item of business to be taken up at the
Meeting shall be serially numbered.
Numbering shall be in a manner which would enable ease of reference
or cross-reference.
1.3.10 Any item not included in the Agenda may be
taken up for consideration with the permission of
the Chairman and with the consent of a majority
of the Directors present in the Meeting.
The decision taken in respect of any other item shall be final only on its
ratification by a majority of the Directors of the company, unless such
item was approved at the Meeting itself by a majority of Directors of
the company.
1.3.11 To transact urgent business, the Notice, Agenda
and Notes on Agenda may be given at shorter
period of time than stated above, if at least one
Independent Director, if any, shall be present at
such Meeting.
If no Independent Director is present, decisions taken at such a
Meeting shall be circulated to all the Directors and shall be final only
on ratification thereof by at least one Independent Director, if any.
10 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
In case the company does not have an Independent Director, the
decisions shall be final only on ratification thereof by a majority of the
Directors of the company, unless such decisions were approved at the
Meeting itself by a majority of Directors of the company.
The fact that the Meeting is being held at a shorter Notice shall be
stated in the Notice.
2. Frequency of Meetings
2.1 Meetings of the Board
The company shall hold at least four Meetings of its
Board in each Calendar Year with a maximum interval
of one hundred and twenty days between any two
consecutive Meetings.
The company shall hold first Meeting of its Board within thirty days of
the date of incorporation. It shall be sufficient if subsequent Meetings
are held with a maximum interval of one hundred and twenty days
between any two consecutive Meetings.
Further, it shall be sufficient if a One Person Company, Small Company,
Dormant Company or private company which is recognised as start-up
holds one Meeting of the Board in each half of a Calendar Year and the
gap between the two Meetings of the Board is not less than ninety days.
An adjourned Meeting being a continuation of the original Meeting,
the interval period in such a case, shall be counted from the date of
the original Meeting.
For the purposes of this Standard, the term “start-up” means a private
company incorporated under the Act and recognised as start-up in
accordance with the notification issued by the Department for Promotion
of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Government of India.
2.2 Meetings of Committees
Committees shall meet as often as necessary subject to
the minimum number and frequency prescribed by any
law or any authority or as stipulated by the Board.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 11
2.3 Meeting of Independent Directors
Where a company is required to appoint Independent
Directors under the Act, such Independent Directors shall
hold at least one Meeting in a financial year without
attendance of Non-Independent Directors and members
of management.
The Meeting shall be held to review the performance of Non-
Independent Directors and the Board as a whole; to review the
performance of the Chairman and to assess the quality, quantity and
timeliness of flow of information between the company management
and the Board and its members that is necessary for the Board to
effectively and reasonably perform their duties.
The Company Secretary, wherever appointed, shall facilitate convening
and holding of such Meeting, if so desired by the Independent Directors.
3. Quorum
3.1 Quorum shall be present throughout the Meeting.
Quorum shall be present not only at the time of
commencement of the Meeting but also while transacting
business.
3.2 A Director shall neither be reckoned for Quorum nor
shall be entitled to participate in respect of an item
of business in which he is interested. However, in case
of a private company, a Director shall be reckoned for
Quorum and entitled to participate in respect of such
item after disclosure of his interest.
For this purpose, a Director shall be treated as interested in a contract
or arrangement entered into or proposed to be entered into by the
company:
(a) with any body corporate, if such Director, along with other
Directors holds more than two percent of the paid-up share
capital of that body corporate, or he is a promoter, or manager
or chief executive officer of that body corporate; or
12 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(b) with a firm or other entity, if such Director is a partner, owner or
Member, as the case may be, of that firm or other entity.
If the item of business is a related party transaction, then he shall not
be present at the Meeting, whether physically or through Electronic
Mode, during discussions and voting on such item.
3.3 Directors participating through Electronic Mode in a
Meeting shall be counted for the purpose of Quorum,
except for restricted items in which Quorum shall
be ascertained on the basis of physical presence of
Directors.
3.4 Meetings of the Board
3.4.1 The Quorum for a Meeting of the Board shall be
one-third of the total strength of the Board, or
two Directors, whichever is higher.
Any fraction contained in the above one-third shall be rounded off to
the next one.
Where the Quorum requirement provided in the Articles is higher than
one-third of the total strength, the company shall conform to such
higher requirement.
Total strength for this purpose, shall not include Directors whose places
are vacant.
If the number of Interested Directors exceeds or is equal to two-thirds
of the total strength, the remaining Directors present at the Meeting,
being not less than two, shall be the Quorum during such item.
If a Meeting of the Board could not be held for want of Quorum, then,
unless otherwise provided in the Articles, the Meeting shall automatically
stand adjourned to the same day in the next week, at the same time
and place or, if that day is a National Holiday, to the next succeeding
day which is not a National Holiday, at the same time and place.
If there is no Quorum at the adjourned Meeting also, the Meeting shall
stand cancelled.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 13
3.4.2 Where the number of Directors is reduced below
the minimum fixed by the Articles, no business
shall be transacted unless the number is first
made up by the remaining Director(s) or through
a General Meeting.
If the number of Directors is reduced below the Quorum fixed by the
Act for a Meeting of the Board, the continuing Directors may act for
the purpose of increasing the number of Directors to that fixed for the
Quorum or of summoning a general meeting of the company, and for
no other purpose.
3.5 Meetings of Committees
Unless otherwise stipulated in the Act or the Articles
or under any other law, the Quorum for Meetings of
any Committee constituted by the Board shall be as
specified by the Board. If no such Quorum is specified,
the presence of all the members of any such Committee
is necessary to form the Quorum.
Regulations framed under any other law may contain provisions for
the Quorum of a Committee and such stipulations shall be followed.
4. Attendance at Meetings
4.1 Attendance register
4.1.1 Every company shall maintain attendance register
for the Meetings of the Board and Meetings of the
Committee.
The pages of the attendance register shall be serially numbered.
If an attendance register is maintained in loose-leaf form, it shall be
bound periodically, atleast once in every three years.
4.1.2 The attendance register shall contain the
following particulars: serial number and date
of the Meeting; in case of a Committee Meeting
name of the Committee; place of the Meeting;
14 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
time of the Meeting; names and signatures of
the Directors, the Company Secretary and also of
persons attending the Meeting by invitation and
their mode of presence, if participating through
Electronic Mode.
4.1.3 The attendance register shall be deemed to have
been signed by the Directors participating through
Electronic Mode, if their attendance is recorded
in the attendance register and authenticated
by the Company Secretary or where there is
no Company Secretary, by the Chairman or by
any other Director present at the Meeting, if so
authorised by the Chairman and the fact of such
participation is also recorded in the Minutes.
In case of Directors participating through Electronic Mode, the Chairman
shall confirm the attendance of such Directors. For this purpose, at the
commencement of the Meeting, the Chairman shall take a roll call. The
Chairman or Company Secretary shall request the Director participating
through Electronic Mode to state his full name and location from where
he is participating and shall record the same in the Minutes. The
proceedings of such Meetings shall be recorded through any electronic
recording mechanism and the details of the venue, date and time shall
be mentioned.
4.1.4 The attendance register shall be maintained at
the Registered Office of the company or such
other place as may be approved by the Board.
The attendance register may be taken to any place where a Meeting
of the Board or Committee is held.
4.1.5 The attendance register is open for inspection
by the Directors. Even after a person ceases to
be a Director, he shall be entitled to inspect the
attendance register of the Meetings held during
the period of his Directorship.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 15
The Company Secretary in Practice appointed by the company or the
Secretarial Auditor or the Statutory Auditor of the company can also
inspect the attendance register as he may consider necessary for the
performance of his duties.
A Member of the company is not entitled to inspect the attendance
register.
4.1.6 The attendance register shall be preserved for
a period of at least eight financial years from
the date of last entry made therein and may be
destroyed thereafter with the approval of the
Board.
4.1.7 The attendance register shall be in the custody of
the Company Secretary.
Where there is no Company Secretary, the attendance register shall
be in the custody of any other person authorised by the Board for this
purpose.
4.2 Leave of absence shall be granted to a Director only
when a request for such leave has been communicated
to the Company Secretary or to the Chairman or to any
other person authorised by the Board to issue Notice of
the Meeting.
The office of a Director shall become vacant in case the Director absents
himself from all the Meetings of the Board held during a period of
twelve months with or without seeking leave of absence of the Board.
5. Chairman
5.1 Meetings of the Board
5.1.1 The Chairman of the company shall be the
Chairman of the Board. If the company does not
have a Chairman, the Directors may elect one of
themselves to be the Chairman of the Board.
5.1.2 The Chairman of the Board shall conduct the
Meetings of the Board. If no such Chairman is
elected or if the Chairman is unable to attend the
16 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Meeting, the Directors present at the Meeting shall
elect one of themselves to chair and conduct the
Meeting, unless otherwise provided in the Articles.
It would be the duty of the Chairman to check, with the assistance of
Company Secretary, that the Meeting is duly convened and constituted
in accordance with the Act or any other applicable guidelines, Rules and
Regulations before proceeding to transact business. The Chairman shall
then conduct the Meeting. The Chairman shall encourage deliberations
and debate and assess the sense of the Meeting.
If the Chairman is interested in an item of business, he shall entrust
the conduct of the proceedings in respect of such item to any Non-
Interested Director, with the consent of the majority of Directors present,
and resume the chair after that item of business has been transacted.
However, in case of a private company, the Chairman may continue
to chair, be reckoned for quorum and entitled to participate in respect
of such item after disclosure of his interest.
If the item of business is a related party transaction, the Chairman shall
not be present at the Meeting, whether physically or through Electronic
Mode, during discussions and voting on such item.
In case some of the Directors participate through Electronic Mode, the
Chairman and the Company Secretary shall take due and reasonable
care to safeguard the integrity of the Meeting by ensuring sufficient
security and identification procedures to record proceedings and safe
keeping of the recordings. No person other than the Director concerned
shall be allowed access to the proceedings of the Meeting where
Director(s) participate through Electronic Mode, except a Director who
is differently abled, provided such Director requests the Board to allow
a person to accompany him and ensures that such person maintains
confidentiality of the matters discussed at the Meeting.
The Chairman shall ensure that the required Quorum is present
throughout the Meeting and at the end of discussion on each agenda
item the Chairman shall announce the summary of the decision taken
thereon.
Unless otherwise provided in the Articles, in case of an equality of votes,
the Chairman shall have a second or casting vote.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 17
5.2 Meetings of Committees
A member of the Committee appointed by the Board
or elected by the Committee as Chairman of the
Committee, in accordance with the Act or any other
law or the Articles, shall conduct the Meetings of the
Committee. If no Chairman has been so elected or if
the elected Chairman is unable to attend the Meeting,
the Committee shall elect one of its members present to
chair and conduct the Meeting of the Committee, unless
otherwise provided in the Articles.
6. Passing of Resolution by Circulation
The Act requires certain business to be approved only at Meetings of
the Board. However, other business that requires urgent decisions can
be approved by means of Resolutions passed by circulation. Resolutions
passed by circulation are deemed to be passed at a duly convened
Meeting of the Board and have equal authority.
6.1 Authority
6.1.1 The Chairman of the Board or in his absence,
the Managing Director or in their absence, any
Director other than an Interested Director, shall
decide, before the draft Resolution is circulated
to all the Directors, whether the approval of the
Board for a particular business shall be obtained
by means of a Resolution by circulation.
An illustrative list of items which shall be placed before the Board at its
Meeting and shall not be passed by circulation is given at Annexure ‘A’.
6.1.2 Where not less than one-third of the total number
of Directors for the time being require the
Resolution under circulation to be decided at a
Meeting, the Chairman shall put the Resolution
for consideration at a Meeting of the Board.
Interested Directors shall not be excluded for the purpose of determining
the above one-third of the total number of Directors.
18 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
6.2 Procedure
6.2.1 A Resolution proposed to be passed by circulation
shall be sent in draft, together with the necessary
papers, to all the Directors including Interested
Directors on the same day.
6.2.2 The draft of the Resolution to be passed and the
necessary papers shall be circulated amongst
the Directors by hand, or by speed post or by
registered post or by courier, or by e-mail or by
any other recognised electronic means.
The draft of the Resolution and the necessary papers shall be sent to
the postal address or e-mail address registered by the Director with
the company or in the absence of such details or any change thereto,
any of the addresses appearing in the Director Identification Number
(DIN) registration of the Director.
Proof of sending and delivery of the draft of the Resolution and the
necessary papers shall be maintained by the company for such period
as decided by the Board, which shall not be less than three years from
the date of circulation of such Resolution.
6.2.3 Each business proposed to be passed by way of
Resolution by circulation shall be explained by
a note setting out the details of the proposal,
relevant material facts that enable the Directors to
understand the meaning, scope and implications
of the proposal, the nature of concern or interest,
if any, of any Director in the proposal, which the
Director had earlier disclosed and the draft of the
Resolution proposed. The note shall also indicate
how a Director shall signify assent or dissent to
the Resolution proposed and the date by which
the Director shall respond.
Each Resolution shall be separately explained.
The decision of the Directors shall be sought for each Resolution
separately.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 19
Not more than seven days from the date of circulation of the draft of
the Resolution shall be given to the Directors to respond and the last
date shall be computed accordingly.
An additional two days shall be added for the service of the draft
Resolution, in case the same has been sent by the company by speed
post or by registered post or by courier.
6.3 Approval
6.3.1 The Resolution is passed when it is approved by
a majority of the Directors entitled to vote on
the Resolution, unless not less than one-third of
the total number of Directors for the time being
require the Resolution under circulation to be
decided at a Meeting.
Every such Resolution shall carry a serial number.
If any special majority or the affirmative vote of any particular Director
or Directors is specified in the Articles, the Resolution shall be passed
only with the assent of such special majority or such affirmative vote.
An Interested Director shall not be entitled to vote. For this purpose,
a Director shall be treated as interested in a contract or arrangement
entered or proposed to be entered into by the company:
(a) with any body corporate, if such Director, along with other
Directors holds more than two percent of the paid-up share
capital of that body corporate, or he is a promoter, or manager
or chief executive officer of that body corporate; or
(b) with a firm or other entity, if such Director is a partner, owner or
Member, as the case may be, of that firm or other entity.
6.3.2 The Resolution, if passed, shall be deemed to
have been passed on the earlier of:
(a) the last date specified for signifying assent
or dissent by the Directors, or
(b) the date on which assent has been received
from the required majority, provided that on
20 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
that date the number of Directors, who have
not yet responded on the resolution under
circulation, along with the Directors who have
expressed their desire that the resolution
under circulation be decided at a Meeting of
the Board, shall not be one third or more of
the total number of Directors; and
shall be effective from that date, if no other
effective date is specified in such Resolution.
Directors shall signify their assent or dissent by signing the Resolution
to be passed by circulation or by e-mail or any other electronic means.
Directors shall append the date on which they have signed the
Resolution. In case a Director does not append a date, the date of
receipt by the company of the signed Resolution shall be taken as the
date of signing.
In cases where the interest of a Director is yet to be communicated to
the company, the concerned Director shall disclose his interest before
the last date specified for the response and abstain from voting.
In case not less than one-third of the Directors wish the matter to be
discussed and decided at a Meeting, each of the concerned Directors
shall communicate the same before the last date specified for the
response.
In case the Director does not respond on or before the last date specified
for signifying assent or dissent, it shall be presumed that the Director
has abstained from voting.
If the approval of the majority of Directors entitled to vote is not received
by the last date specified for receipt of such approval, the Resolution
shall be considered as not passed.
6.4 Recording
Resolutions passed by circulation shall be noted at a
subsequent Meeting of the Board and the text thereof
with dissent or abstention, if any, shall be recorded in
the Minutes of such Meeting.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 21
6.5 Validity
Passing of Resolution by circulation shall be considered
valid as if it had been passed at a duly convened Meeting
of the Board.
This shall not dispense with the requirement for the Board to meet at
the specified frequency.
7. Minutes
Every company shall keep Minutes of all Board and Committee Meetings
in a Minutes Book. Minutes kept in accordance with the provisions of
the Act evidence the proceedings recorded therein. Minutes help in
understanding the deliberations and decisions taken at the Meeting.
7.1 Maintenance of Minutes
7.1.1 Minutes shall be recorded in books maintained
for that purpose.
7.1.2 A distinct Minutes Book shall be maintained for
Meetings of the Board and each of its Committees.
7.1.3 A company may maintain its Minutes in physical
or in electronic form.
Minutes may be maintained in electronic form in such manner as
prescribed under the Act and as may be decided by the Board. Minutes
in electronic form shall be maintained with Timestamp.
A company shall however follow a uniform and consistent form of
maintaining the Minutes. Any deviation in such form of maintenance
shall be authorised by the Board.
7.1.4 The pages of the Minutes Books shall be
consecutively numbered.
This shall be followed irrespective of a break in the Book arising out of
periodical binding in case the Minutes are maintained in physical form.
This shall be equally applicable for maintenance of Minutes Book in
electronic form with Timestamp.
22 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
In the event any page or part thereof in the Minutes Book is left blank,
it shall be scored out and initialled by the Chairman who signs the
Minutes.
7.1.5 Minutes shall not be pasted or attached to the
Minutes Book, or tampered with in any manner.
7.1.6 Minutes Books, if maintained in loose-leaf form,
shall be bound periodically depending on the
size and volume and coinciding with one or more
financial years of the company.
There shall be a proper locking device to ensure security and proper
control to prevent removal or manipulation of the loose leaves.
7.1.7 Minutes Books shall be kept at the Registered
Office of the company or at such other place as
may be approved by the Board.
7.2 Contents of Minutes
7.2.1 General Contents
7.2.1.1 Minutes shall state, at the beginning the serial
number and type of the Meeting, name of
the company, day, date, venue and time of
commencement of the Meeting.
In respect of a Meeting adjourned for want of Quorum, a statement
to that effect by the Chairman or in his absence, by any other Director
present at the Meeting shall be recorded in the Minutes.
7.2.1.2 Minutes shall record the names of the Directors
present physically or through Electronic Mode, the
Company Secretary who is in attendance at the
Meeting and Invitees, if any, including Invitees for
specific items.
The names of the Directors shall be listed in alphabetical order or in
any other logical manner, but in either case starting with the name of
the person in the Chair.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 23
The capacity in which an Invitee attends the Meeting and where
applicable, the name of the entity such Invitee represents and the
relation, if any, of that entity to the company shall also be recorded.
7.2.1.3 Minutes shall contain a record of all appointments
made at the Meeting.
Where the Minutes have been kept in accordance with the Act and all
appointments have been recorded, then until the contrary is proved,
all appointments of Directors, First Auditors, Key Managerial Personnel,
Secretarial Auditors, Internal Auditors and Cost Auditors, shall be
deemed to have been duly approved by the Board.
7.2.2 Specific Contents
7.2.2.1 Minutes shall inter-alia contain:
(a) The name(s) of Directors present and their
mode of attendance, if through Electronic
Mode.
(b) In case of a Director participating through
Electronic Mode, his particulars, the location
from where he participated and wherever
required, his consent to sign the statutory
registers placed at the Meeting.
(c) The name of Company Secretary who is in
attendance and Invitees, if any, for specific
items and mode of their attendance if
through Electronic Mode.
(d) Record of election, if any, of the Chairman
of the Meeting.
(e) Record of presence of Quorum.
(f) The names of Directors who sought and
were granted leave of absence.
(g) Noting of the Minutes of the preceding
Meeting.
24 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(h) Noting the Minutes of the Meetings of the
Committees.
(i) The text of the Resolution(s) passed by
circulation since the last Meeting, including
dissent or abstention, if any.
(j) The fact that an Interested Director did not
participate in the discussions and did not
vote on item of business in which he was
interested and in case of a related party
transaction such director was not present in
the meeting during discussions and voting
on such item.
(k) The views of the Directors particularly the
Independent Director, if specifically insisted
upon by such Directors, provided these,
in the opinion of the Chairman, are not
defamatory of any person, not irrelevant
or immaterial to the proceedings or not
detrimental to the interests of the company.
(l) If any Director has participated only for a
part of the Meeting, the Agenda items in
which he did not participate.
(m) The fact of the dissent and the name of the
Director who dissented from the Resolution
or abstained from voting thereon.
(n) Ratification by Independent Director or
majority of Directors, as the case may be, in
case of Meetings held at a shorter Notice.
(o) Consideration of any item other than those
included in the Agenda with the consent
of majority of the Directors present at the
Meeting and ratification of the decision
taken in respect of such item by a majority
of Directors of the company.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 25
(p) The time of commencement and conclusion
of the Meeting.
7.2.2.2 Apart from the Resolution or the decision,
Minutes shall mention the brief background of
all proposals and summarise the deliberations
thereof. In case of major decisions, the rationale
thereof shall also be mentioned.
The decisions shall be recorded in the form of Resolutions, where it is
statutorily or otherwise required. In other cases, the decisions can be
recorded in a narrative form.
Where a Resolution was passed pursuant to the Chairman of the
Meeting exercising his second or casting vote, the Minutes shall record
such fact.
7.3 Recording of Minutes
7.3.1 Minutes shall contain a fair and correct summary
of the proceedings of the Meeting.
The Company Secretary shall record the proceedings of the Meetings.
Where there is no Company Secretary, any other person duly authorised
by the Board or by the Chairman in this behalf shall record the
proceedings.
The Chairman shall ensure that the proceedings of the Meeting are
correctly recorded.
The Chairman has absolute discretion to exclude from the Minutes,
matters which in his opinion are or could reasonably be regarded as
defamatory of any person, irrelevant or immaterial to the proceedings
or which are detrimental to the interests of the company.
7.3.2 Minutes shall be written in clear, concise and
plain language.
Minutes shall be written in third person and past tense. Resolutions
shall however be written in present tense.
Minutes need not be an exact transcript of the proceedings at the
Meeting.
26 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
In case any Director requires his views or opinion on a particular item
to be recorded verbatim in the Minutes, the decision of the Chairman
whether or not to do so shall be final.
7.3.3 Wherever the decision of the Board is based on
any unsigned documents including reports or
notes or presentations tabled or presented at
the Meeting, which were not part of the Notes on
Agenda and are referred to in the Minutes, shall
be identified by initialling of such documents by
the Company Secretary or the Chairman.
7.3.4 Where any earlier Resolution(s) or decision is
superseded or modified, Minutes shall contain
a specific reference to such earlier Resolution(s)
or decision or state that the Resolution is in
supersession of all earlier Resolutions passed in
that regard.
7.3.5 Minutes of the preceding Meeting shall be noted
at a Meeting of the Board held immediately
following the date of entry of such Minutes in the
Minutes Book.
Minutes of the Meetings of any Committee shall be noted at a Meeting
of the Board held immediately following the date of entry of such
Minutes in the Minutes Book.
7.4 Finalisation of Minutes
Within fifteen days from the date of the conclusion of
the Meeting of the Board or the Committee, the draft
Minutes thereof shall be circulated by hand or by speed
post or by registered post or by courier or by e-mail
or by any other recognised electronic means to all the
members of the Board or the Committee, as on the date
of the Meeting, for their comments.
Where a Director specifies a particular means of delivery of draft
Minutes, these shall be sent to him by such means.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 27
Proof of sending draft Minutes and its delivery shall be maintained by
the company for such period as decided by the Board, which shall not
be less than three years from the date of the Meeting.
The Directors, whether present at the Meeting or not, shall communicate
their comments, if any, in writing on the draft Minutes within seven days
from the date of circulation thereof, so that the Minutes are finalised
and entered in the Minutes Book within the specified time limit of thirty
days.
If any Director communicates his comments after the expiry of the said
period of seven days, the Chairman, if so authorised by the Board, shall
have the discretion to consider such comments.
In the event a Director does not comment on the draft Minutes, the draft
Minutes shall be deemed to have been approved by such Director.
A Director, who ceases to be a Director after a Meeting of the Board
is entitled to receive the draft Minutes of that particular Meeting and
to offer comments thereon, irrespective of whether he attended such
Meeting or not.
7.5 Entry in the Minutes Book
7.5.1 Minutes shall be entered in the Minutes Book
within thirty days from the date of conclusion of
the Meeting.
In case a Meeting is adjourned, the Minutes in respect of the original
Meeting as well as the adjourned Meeting shall be entered in the
Minutes Book within thirty days from the date of the respective Meetings.
7.5.2 The date of entry of the Minutes in the Minutes
Book shall be recorded by the Company Secretary.
Where there is no Company Secretary, it shall be entered by any other
person duly authorised by the Board or by the Chairman.
7.5.3 Minutes, once entered in the Minutes Book, shall
not be altered. Any alteration in the Minutes as
entered shall be made only by way of express
approval of the Board at its subsequent Meeting
28 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
at which the Minutes are noted by the Board and
the fact of such alteration shall be recorded in the
Minutes of such subsequent Meeting.
7.6 Signing and Dating of Minutes
7.6.1 Minutes of the Meeting of the Board shall be
signed and dated by the Chairman of the Meeting
or by the Chairman of the next Meeting.
Minutes of the previous Meeting may be signed either by the Chairman
of such Meeting at any time before the next Meeting is held or by the
Chairman of the next Meeting at the next Meeting.
7.6.2 The Chairman shall initial each page of the
Minutes, sign the last page and append to such
signature the date on which and the place where
he has signed the Minutes.
Any blank space in a page between the conclusion of the Minutes and
signature of the Chairman shall be scored out.
If the Minutes are maintained in electronic form, the Chairman shall
sign the Minutes digitally.
7.6.3 Minutes, once signed by the Chairman, shall not
be altered, save as mentioned in this Standard.
7.6.4 Within fifteen days of signing of the Minutes, a
copy of the said signed Minutes, certified by the
Company Secretary or where there is no Company
Secretary by any Director authorised by the Board,
shall be circulated to all the Directors, as on the
date of the Meeting and appointed thereafter,
except to those Directors who have waived their
right to receive the same either in writing or such
waiver is recorded in the Minutes.
Proof of sending signed Minutes and its delivery shall be
maintained by the company for such period as decided
by the Board, which shall not be less than three years
from the date of the Meeting.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 29
7.7 Inspection and Extracts of Minutes
7.7.1 The Minutes of Meetings of the Board and any
Committee thereof can be inspected by the Directors.
A Director is entitled to inspect the Minutes of a Meeting held before
the period of his Directorship.
A Director is entitled to inspect the Minutes of the Meetings held during
the period of his Directorship, even after he ceases to be a Director.
The Company Secretary in Practice appointed by the company, the
Secretarial Auditor, the Statutory Auditor, the Cost Auditor or the Internal
Auditor of the company can inspect the Minutes as he may consider
necessary for the performance of his duties.
Inspection of Minutes Book may be provided in physical or in electronic
form.
While providing inspection of Minutes Book, the Company Secretary
or the official of the company authorised by the Company Secretary
to facilitate inspection shall take all precautions to ensure that the
Minutes Book is not mutilated or in any way tampered with by the
person inspecting.
A Member of the company is not entitled to inspect the Minutes of
Meetings of the Board.
7.7.2 Extracts of the Minutes shall be given only after
the Minutes have been duly entered in the Minutes
Book. However, certified copies of any Resolution
passed at a Meeting may be issued even earlier,
if the text of that Resolution had been placed at
the Meeting.
A Director is entitled to receive, a copy of the Minutes of a Meeting held
before the period of his Directorship.
A Director is entitled to receive a copy of the signed Minutes of a
Meeting held during the period of his Directorship, even if he ceases
to be a Director.
Extracts of the duly signed Minutes may be provided in physical or
electronic form.
30 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
8. Preservation of Minutes and other Records
8.1 Minutes of all Meetings shall be preserved permanently
in physical or in electronic form with Timestamp.
Where, under a scheme of arrangement, a company has been merged
or amalgamated with another company, Minutes of all Meetings of the
transferor company, as handed over to the transferee company, shall
be preserved permanently by the transferee company, notwithstanding
that the transferor company might have been dissolved.
8.2 Office copies of Notices, Agenda, Notes on Agenda and
other related papers shall be preserved in good order in
physical or in electronic form for as long as they remain
current or for eight financial years, whichever is later
and may be destroyed thereafter with the approval of
the Board.
Office copies of Notices, Agenda, Notes on Agenda and other related
papers of the transferor company, as handed over to the transferee
company, shall be preserved in good order in physical or electronic form
for as long as they remain current or for eight financial years, whichever
is later and may be destroyed thereafter with the approval of the Board
and permission of the Central Government, where applicable.
8.3 Minutes Books shall be in the custody of the Company
Secretary.
Where there is no Company Secretary, Minutes Books shall be in the
custody of any Director duly authorised for the purpose by the Board.
9. Disclosure
The Report of the Board of Directors shall include a statement on
compliances of applicable Secretarial Standards.
EFFECTIVE DATE
This Standard shall come into effect from 1st April, 2024.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 31
Annexure ‘A’
(Paragraph 1.3.8)
Illustrative list of items of business which shall not be passed by
circulation and shall be placed before the Board at its Meeting
General Business Items
l Noting Minutes of Meetings of Audit Committee and other
Committees.
l Approving financial statements and the Board’s Report.
l Considering the Compliance Certificate to ensure compliance
with the provisions of all the laws applicable to the company.
l Specifying list of laws applicable specifically to the company.
l Appointment of Secretarial Auditors and Internal Auditors.
Specific Items
l Borrowing money otherwise than by issue of debentures.
l Investing the funds of the company.
l Granting loans or giving guarantee or providing security in
respect of loans.
l Making political contributions.
l Making calls on shareholders in respect of money unpaid on
their shares.
l Approving Remuneration of Managing Director, Whole-time
Director and Manager.
l Appointment or Removal of Key Managerial Personnel.
l Appointment of a person as a Managing Director / Manager in
more than one company.
l Appointment of Director(s) in casual vacancy subject to the
provisions in the Articles of the company. To be subsequently
approved in the immediate next general meeting.
32 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
l According sanction for related party transactions which are not
in the ordinary course of business or which are not on arm’s
length basis.
l Sale of subsidiaries.
l Purchase and Sale of material tangible/intangible assets not in
the ordinary course of business.
l Approve Payment to Director for loss of office.
l Items arising out of separate Meeting of the Independent
Directors if so decided by the Independent Directors.
Corporate Actions
l Authorise Buy Back of Securities.
l Issue of securities, including debentures, whether in or outside
India.
l Approving amalgamation, merger or reconstruction.
l Diversify the business.
l Takeover another company or acquiring controlling or
substantial stake in another company.
Additional list of items in case of listed companies
l Approving Annual operating plans and budgets.
l Capital budgets and any updates.
l Information on remuneration of Key Managerial Personnel.
l Show cause, demand, prosecution notices and penalty notices
which are materially important.
l Fatal or serious accidents, dangerous occurrences, any
material effluent or pollution problems.
l Any material default in financial obligations to and by the
company, or substantial non-payment for goods sold by the
company.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 33
l Any issue, which involves possible public or product liability
claims of substantial nature, including any judgement or
order which, may have passed strictures on the conduct of
the company or taken an adverse view regarding another
enterprise that can have negative implications on the company.
l Details of any joint venture or collaboration agreement.
l Transactions that involve substantial payment towards
goodwill, brand equity, or intellectual property.
l Significant labour problems and their proposed solutions.
Any significant development in Human Resources/ Industrial
Relations front like signing of wage agreement, implementation
of Voluntary Retirement Scheme etc.
l Quarterly details of foreign exchange exposures and the steps
taken by management to limit the risks of adverse exchange
rate movement, if material.
l Non-compliance of any regulatory, statutory or listing
requirements and shareholder services such as non-payment
of dividend, delay in share transfer etc.
34 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Annexure ‘B’
(Paragraph 1.3.8)
Illustrative list of items of business for the Agenda for the First
Meeting of the Board of the company
1. To appoint the Chairman of the Meeting.
2. To note the Certificate of Incorporation of the company, issued
by the Registrar of Companies.
3. To take note of the Memorandum and Articles of Association of
the company, as registered.
4. To note the situation of the Registered Office of the company
and ratify the registered document of the title of the premises of
the registered office in the name of the company or a Notarised
copy of lease / rent agreement in the name of the company.
5. To note the first Directors of the company.
6. To read and record the Notices of disclosure of interest given by
the Directors.
7. To consider appointment of Additional Directors.
8. To consider appointment of the Chairman of the Board.
9. To consider appointment of the first Auditors.
10. To adopt the Common Seal of the company, if any.
11. To appoint Bankers and to open bank accounts of the company.
12. To authorise printing of share certificates and correspondence
with the depositories, if any.
13. To authorise the issue of share certificates to the subscribers to
the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the company.
14. To approve and ratify preliminary expenses and preliminary
agreements.
15. To approve the appointment of the Key Managerial Personnel,
if applicable and other senior officers.
SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 35
NOTES
36 SS-1 – SECRETARIAL STANDARD ON MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
NOTES
